# COMMODORE 64 - Detailed description of timer control register functions: Start/Stop (software start/stop), PB On/Off (force timer output onto PB6 for Timer A and PB7 for Timer B overriding DDRB), Toggle/Pulse (output toggles on underflow or generates a one-cycle positive pulse; toggle is set high on timer start and cleared by /RES), One-Shot/Continuous (one-shot counts to zero, interrupts, reloads latch and stops; continuous reloads and repeats), Force Load (strobe to load latch into counter immediately), and Input Mode selections (clock sources: 02 clock, external CNT pulses; Timer B can count 02 pulses, external CNT, Timer A underflow pulses, and variants with CNT held high).


  Start/Stop

    A control bit allows the timer to be started or stopped by the micro-
  processor at any time.

  PB On/Off:

    A control bit allows the timer output to appear on a PORT B output line
  (PB6 for TIMER A and PB7 for TIMER B). This function overrides the DDRB
  control bit and forces the appropriate PB line to an output.

  Toggle/Pulse

    A control bit selects the output applied to PORT B. On every timer
  underflow the output can either toggle or generate a single positive
  pulse of one cycle duration. The Toggle output is set high whenever the
  timer is started and is set low by /RES.

  One-Shot/Continuous

    A control bit selects either timer mode. In one-shot mode, the timer
  will count down from the latched value to zero, generate an interrupt,
  reload the latched value, then stop. In continuous mode, the timer will
  count from the latched value to zero, generate' an interrupt, reload the
  latched value and repeat the procedure continuously.

  Force Load

    A strobe bit allows the timer latch to be loaded into the timer counter
  at any time, whether the timer is running or not.

  Input Mode:

    Control bits allow selection of the clock used to decrement the timer.
  TIMER A can count 02 clock pulses or external pulses applied to the CNT
  pin. TIMER B can count (02 pulses, external CNT pulses, TIMER A underflow
  pulses or TIMER A underflow pulses while the CNT pin is held high.

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "6526_timers_overview" which expands on General purpose and capabilities of the timers
- "6526_timer_registers_and_load_behavior" which expands on When latch loads occur and register formats for reads/writes
