# COMMODORE 64 - SID MODE/VOL register and miscellaneous read registers: MODE/VOL bit definitions (LP, BP, HP filter outputs, 3OFF, volume nibble), how filter outputs are additive, volume control behavior; POTX and POTY A/D converter read registers (update timing and recommended pot/cap values), OSC3/RANDOM and ENV3 read registers (usage as modulation/random sources), and how OSC3/ENV3 can be used for modulation or random number generation.


                                                           APPENDIX O   467
~


  MODE/VOL (Register $18)

    Bits 4-7 of this register select various Filter mode and output
  options:
    LP (Bit 4): When set to a one, the Low-Pass output of the Filter is
  selected and sent to the audio output. For a given Filter input signal,
  all frequency components below the Filter Cutoff Frequency are passed
  unaltered, while all frequency components above the Cutoff are attenuated
  at a rate of 12 dB/Octave. The Low-Pass mode produces fullbodied sounds.
    BP (Bit 5): Same as bit 4 for the Bandpass output. All frequency
  components above and below the Cutoff are attenuated at a rate of 6
  dB/Octave. The Bandpass mode produces thin, open sounds.
    HP (Bit 6): Same as bit 4 for the High-Pass output. All frequency
  components above the Cutoff are passed unaltered, while all frequency
  components below the Cutoff are attenuated at a rate of 12 dB/Octave.
  The High-Pass mode produces tinny, buzzy sounds.
    3 OFF (Bit 7): When set to a one, the output of Voice 3 is disconnected
  from the direct audio path. Setting Voice 3 to bypass the Filter
  (FILT 3 = 0) and setting 3 OFF to a one prevents Voice 3 from reaching
  the audio output. This allows Voice 3 to be used for modulation purposes
  without any undesirable output.

  +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | NOTE: The Filter output modes ARE additive and multiple Filter modes  |
  | may be selected simultaneously. For example, both LP and HP modes can |
  | be selected to produce a Notch (or Band Reject) Filter response. In   |
  | order for the Filter to have any audible effect, at least one Filter  |
  | output must be selected and at least one Voice must be routed through |
  | the Filter. The Filter is, perhaps, the most important element in SID |
  | as it allows the generation of complex tone colors via subtractive    |
  | synthesis (the Filter is used to eliminate specific frequency         |
  | components from a harmonically rich input signal). The best results   |
  | are achieved by varying the Cutoff Frequency in real-time.            |
  +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

    Bits 0-3 (VOL0-VOL3) select 1 of 16 overall Volume levels for the final
  composite audio output. The output volume levels range from no output (0)
  to maximum volume (15 or $F) in 16 linear steps. This control can be used
  as a static volume control for balancing levels in multi-chip systems or
  for creating dynamic volume effects, such as Tremolo. Some Volume level
  other than zero must be selected in order for SID to produce any sound.


  468   APPENDIX O
~


  MISCELLANEOUS

  POTX (Register $19)

    This register allows the microprocessor to read the position of the
  potentiometer tied to POTX (pin 24), with values ranging from 0 at
  minimum resistance, to 255 ($FF) at maximum resistance. The value is
  always valid and is updated every 512 (02 clock cycles. See the Pin
  Description section for information on pot and capacitor values.

  POTY (Register $1A)

    Same as POTX for the pot tied to POTY (pin 23).

  OSC 3/RANDOM (Register $1B)

    This register allows the microprocessor to read the upper 8 output bits
  of Oscillator 3. The character of the numbers generated is directly re-
  lated to the waveform selected. If the Sawtooth waveform of Oscillator 3
  is selected, this register will present a series of numbers incrementing
  from 0 to 255 ($FF) at a rate determined by the frequency of Oscillator
  3. If the Triangle waveform is selected, the output will increment from 0
  up to 255, then decrement down to 0. If the Pulse waveform is selected,
  the output will jump between 0 and 255. Selecting the Noise waveform
  will produce a series of random numbers, therefore, this register can be
  used as a random number generator for games. There are numerous timing
  and sequencing applications for the OSC 3 register, however, the chief
  function is probably that of a modulation generator. The numbers
  generated by this register can be added, via software, to the Oscillator
  or Filter Frequency registers or the Pulse Width registers in real-time.
  Many dynamic effects can be generated in this manner. Siren-like sounds
  can be created by adding the OSC 3 Sawtooth output to the frequency
  control of another oscillator. Synthesizer "Sample and Hold" effects can
  be produced by adding the OSC 3 Noise output to the Filter Frequency
  control registers. Vibrato can be produced by setting Oscillator 3 to a
  frequency around 7 Hz and adding the OSC 3 Triangle output (with proper
  scaling) to the Frequency control of another oscillator. An unlimited
  range of effects are available by altering the frequency of Oscillator 3
  and scaling the OSC 3 output. Normally, when Oscillator 3 is used for
  modulation, the audio output of Voice 3 should be eliminated (3 OFF = 1).



                                                           APPENDIX O   469
~


  ENV 3 (Register $1C)

    Same as OSC 3, but this register allows the microprocessor to read the
  output of the Voice 3 Envelope Generator. This output can be added to the
  Filter Frequency to produce harmonic envelopes, WAH-WAH, and similar
  effects. "Phaser" sounds can be created by adding this output to the
  frequency control registers of an oscillator. The Voice 3 Envelope
  Generator must be Gated in order to produce any output from this regis-
  ter. The OSC 3 register, however, always reflects the changing output of
  the oscillator and is not affected in any way by the Envelope Generator.



  SID PIN DESCRIPTION

  CAP1A,CAP1B, (Pins 1,2)/ CAP2A,CAP2B (Pins 3,4)

    These pins are used to connect the two integrating capacitors required
  by the programmable Filter. C1 connects between pins 1 and 2, C2 between
  pins 3 and 4. Both capacitors should be the some value. Normal operation

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "6581_sid_envelopes_and_voice2_voice3_filter" which expands on filter routing and voice routing bits described earlier
- "6581_sid_pin_descriptions_part1" which expands on hardware pins (POTX/POTY, EXT IN, AUDIO OUT) for these functions
