# COMMODORE 64 - SID pin descriptions: CAP1/CAP2 pins (CAP1A/CAP1B, CAP2A/CAP2B) for filter integrator capacitors (recommended values and formula FCmax = 2.6E-5/C), RES pin reset behavior, 02 (clock) behavior and its role as data-transfer gating, R/W pin for data direction, CS (/CS) chip select timing and address decode conditions, A0-A4 address inputs and addressing limitations, and GND grounding recommendations.

  of the Filter over the audio range (approximately 30 Hz-12 kHz) is
  accomplished with a value of 2200 pF for C1 and C2. Polystyrene
  capacitors are preferred and in complex polyphonic systems, where many
  SID chips must track each other, matched capacitors are recommended.
    The frequency range of the Filter can be tailored to specific applica-
  tions by the choice of capacitor values. For example, a low-cost game may
  not require full high-frequency response. In this case, larger values
  for C1 and C2 could be chosen to provide more control over the bass
  frequencies of the Filter. The maximum Cutoff Frequency of the Filter is
  given by:

                             FCmax = 2.6E-5/C

  Where C is the capacitor value. The range of the Filter extends 9 octaves
  below the maximum Cutoff Frequency.

  RES (Pin 5)

    This TTL-level input is the reset control for SID. When brought low for
  at least ten 02 cycles, all internal registers are reset to zero and the
  audio output is silenced. This pin is normally connected to the reset
  line of the microprocessor or a power-on-clear circuit.

  470   APPENDIX O
~


  02 (Pin 6)

    This TTL-Level input is the master clock for SID. All oscillator
  frequencies and envelope rates are referenced to this clock. 02 also
  controls data transfers between SID and the microprocessor. Data can only
  be transferred when (02 is high. Essentially, (02 acts as a high-active
  chip select as far as data transfers are concerned. This pin is normally
  connected to the system clock, with a nominal operating frequency of 1.0
  MHz.

  R/W  (Pin 7)

    This TTL-level input controls the direction of data transfers between
  SID and the microprocessor. If the chip select conditions have been met,
  a high on this line allows the microprocessor to Read data from the
  selected SID register and a low allows the microprocessor to Write data
  into the selected SID register. This pin is normally connected to the
  system Read/Write line.

  CS (Pin 8)

    This TTL-Level input is a low active chip select which controls data
  transfers between SID and the microprocessor. CS must be low for any
  transfer. A Read from the selected SID register can only occur if CS is
  low, 02 is high and R/W is high. A Write to the selected SID register can
  only occur if CS is low, (02 is high and R/W is low. This pin is normally
  connected to address decoding circuitry, allowing SID to reside in the
  memory map of a system.

  A0-A4 (Pins 9-13)

    These TTL-Level inputs are used to select one of the 29 SID registers.
  Although enough addresses are provided to select 1 of 32 registers, the
  remaining three register locations are not used. A Write to any of these
  three locations is ignored and a Read returns invalid data. These pins
  are normally connected to the corresponding address lines of the micro-
  processor so that SID may be addressed in the same manner as memory.

  GND (Pin 14)

    For best results, the ground line between SID and the power supply
  should be separate from ground lines to other digital circuitry. This
  will minimize digital noise at the audio output.
                                                           APPENDIX O   471

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "6581_sid_mode_volume_misc_and_io" which expands on POTX/POTY and EXT IN interactions described in later pin descriptions
- "6581_sid_pin_descriptions_part2" which expands on continuation: data bus, POT interface, EXT IN and AUDIO OUT pin details
