# COMMODORE 64 - SID pin descriptions continued: D0-D7 bidirectional data bus behavior and drive capability, POTX/POTY A/D converter timing and recommended R/C values (recommended R=470kΩ, C=1000 pF), VCC and bypass recommendations, EXT IN analog input guidance (impedance ~100kΩ, recommended AC coupling and acceptable signal levels), AUDIO OUT (open-source buffer, typical levels, DC level 6V, recommended source resistor and AC coupling), and VDD (+12V) power recommendations.

~


  D0-D7 (Pins 15-22)

    These bidirectional lines are used to transfer data between SID and the
  microprocessor. They are TTL compatible in the input mode and capable of
  driving 2 TTL loads in the output mode. The data buffers are usually in
  the high-impedance off state. During a Write operation, the data buffers
  remain in the off (input) state and the microprocessor supplies data to
  SID over these lines. During a Read operation, the data buffers turn on
  and SID supplies data to the microprocessor over these lines. The pins
  are normally connected to the corresponding data lines of the micro-
  processor.

  POTX,POTY (Pins 24,23)

    These pins are inputs to the A/D converters used to digitize the posi-
  tion of potentiometers. The conversion process is based on the time con-
  stant of a capacitor tied from the POT pin to ground, charged by a
  potentiometer tied from the POT pin to +5 volts. The component values are
  determined by:

                                RC = 4.7E-4

  Where R is the maximum resistance of the pot and C is the capacitor.
    The larger the capacitor, the smaller the POT value jitter. The recom-
  mended values for R and C are 470 komhs and 1000 pF. Note that a separate
  pot and cap are required for each POT pin.

  VCC (Pin 25)

    As with the GND line, a separate +5 VDC line should be run between SID
  Vcc and the power supply in order to minimize noise. A bypass capacitor
  should be located close to the pin.

  EXT IN (Pin 26)

    This analog input allows external audio signals to be mixed with the
  audio output of SID or processed through the Filter. Typical sources in-
  clude voice, guitar, and organ. The input impedance of this pin is on the
  order of 100 kohms. Any signal applied directly to the pin should ride at
  a DC level of 6 volts and should not exceed 3 volts p-p. In order to pre-



  472   APPENDIX O
~


  vent any interference caused by DC level differences, external signals
  should be AC-coupled to EXT IN by an electrolytic capacitor in the 1-10
  uF range. As the direct audio path (FILTEX=0) has unity gain, EXT IN can
  be used to mix outputs of many SID chips by daisy-chaining. The number of
  chips that can be chained in this manner is determined by the amount of
  noise and distortion allowable at the final output. Note that the output
  Volume control will affect not only the three SID voices, but also any
  external inputs.

  AUDIO OUT (Pin 27)

    This open-source buffer is the final audio output of SID, comprised of
  the three SID voices, the Filter and any external input. The output level
  is set by the output Volume control and reaches a maximum of 2 volts p-p
  at a DC level of 6 volts. A source resistor from AUDIO OUT to ground is
  required for proper operation. The recommended resistance is 1 kohm for
  a standard output impedance.
    As the output of SID rides at a 6-volt DC level, it should be AC-
  coupled to any audio amplifier with an electrolytic capacitor in the 1-10
  uF range.

  VDD (Pin 28)

    As with Vcc, a separate +12 VDC line should be run to SID VDD and a
  bypass capacitor should be used.

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "6581_sid_pin_descriptions_part1" which expands on complements pin descriptions (CAP, RES, 02, address pins)
- "6581_sid_characteristics_and_electrical_tables" which expands on absolute maximum ratings and electrical characteristics for these pins
