# COMMODORE 64 - Descriptions of the 6510/6502 addressing modes: Accumulator, Immediate, Absolute (low/high byte order, access to full 64K), Zero Page (shorter fetch and execution, implied high byte zero), Indexed Zero Page (Zero Page,X/Y — no page crossing), Indexed Absolute (Absolute,X/Y — adds index to full 16-bit base, may cross pages), Implied, Relative (branch offset +/-128 from next instruction), Indexed Indirect ([Indirect, X]) where ZP pointer is computed by second byte + X (wrap in page zero) to fetch low/high address bytes, Indirect Indexed ([Indirect], Y) where ZP pointer contents + Y produce effective address with carry into high byte, and Absolute Indirect (JMP indirect: two-byte pointer supplied by instruction yields low/high effective PC).

  ADDRESSING MODES

  ACCUMULATOR ADDRESSING - This form of addressing is represented with a
  one byte instruction, implying an operation on the accumulator.

  IMMEDIATE ADDRESSING - In immediate addressing, the operand is contained
  in the second byte of the instruction, with no further memory addressing
  required.

  ABSOLUTE ADDRESSING - In absolute addressing, the second byte of the
  instruction specifies the eight low order bits of the effective address
  while the third byte specifies the eight high order bits. Thus, the
  absolute addressing mode allows access to the entire 64K bytes of
  addressable memory.

  ZERO PAGE ADDRESSING - The zero page instructions allow for shorter code

                                                           APPENDIX L   411
~


  and execution times by only fetching the second byte of the instruction
  and assuming a zero high address byte. Careful use of the zero page can
  result in significant increase in code efficiency.

  INDEXED ZERO PAGE ADDRESSING - (X, Y indexing)-This form of addressing is
  used in conjunction with the index register and is referred to as "Zero
  Page, X" or "Zero Page, Y." The effective address is calculated by adding
  the second byte to the contents of the index register. Since this is a
  form of "Zero Page" addressing, the content of the second byte references
  a location in page zero. Additionally, due to the "Zero Page" addressing
  nature of this mode, no carry is added to the high order 8 bits of memory
  and crossing of page boundaries does not occur.

  INDEXED ABSOLUTE ADDRESSING - (X, Y indexing)-This form of addressing is
  used in conjunction with X and Y index register and is referred to as
  "Absolute, X," and "Absolute, Y." The effective address is formed by
  adding the contents of X and Y to the address contained in the second and
  third bytes of the instruction. This mode allows the index register to
  contain the index or count value and the instruction to contain the base
  address. This type of indexing allows any location referencing and the
  index to modify multiple fields resulting in reduced coding and execution
  time.

  IMPLIED ADDRESSING - In the implied addressing mode, the address
  containing the operand is implicitly stated in the operation code of the
  instruction.

  RELATIVE ADDRESSING - Relative addressing is used only with branch
  instructions and establishes a destination for the conditional branch.

  The second byte of the instruction becomes the operand which is an
  "Offset" added to the contents of the lower eight bits of the program
  counter when the counter is set at the next instruction. The range of the
  offset is -128 to +127 bytes from the next instruction.

  INDEXED INDIRECT ADDRESSING - In indexed indirect addressing (referred to
  as [Indirect, X]), the second byte of the instruction is added to the
  contents of the X index register, discarding the carry. The result of
  this addition points to a memory location on page zero whose contents is
  the low order eight bits of the effective address. The next memory loca-
  tion in page zero contains the high order eight bits of the effective ad-
  dress. Both memory locations specifying the high and low order bytes of

  412   APPENDIX L
~


  the effective address must be in page zero.

  INDIRECT INDEXED ADDRESSING - In indirect indexed addressing (referred to
  as [Indirect], Y), the second byte of the instruction points to a memory
  location in page zero. The contents of this memory location is added to
  the contents of the Y index register, the result being the low order
  eight bits of the effective address. The carry from this addition is
  added to the contents of the next page zero memory location, the result
  being the high order eight bits of the effective address.

  ABSOLUTE INDIRECT - The second byte of the instruction contains the low
  order eight bits of a memory location. The high order eight bits of that
  memory location is contained in the third byte of the instruction. The
  contents of the fully specified memory location is the low order byte of
  the effective address. The next memory location contains the high order
  byte of the effective address which is loaded into the sixteen bits of
  the program counter.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "signal_descriptions" which expands on Bus and timing behavior for memory accesses performed by these addressing modes
- "instruction_mnemonics_alphabetic_list" which expands on Instructions that use each addressing mode (e.g., LDA, STA, JMP, branches)
