# MACHINE - Definitions of addressing modes used by 6502: accumulator, immediate, absolute, zero page, indexed zero page (ZP,X / ZP,Y), indexed absolute (ABS,X / ABS,Y), implied, relative (branch offsets -128..+127), indexed indirect (IND,X) and indirect indexed (IND),Y, and absolute indirect. Explains how effective addresses are formed for each mode.


                                                                        :148:

Addressing Modes
----------------

Accumulator Addressing--This form of addressing is represented with a one
byte instruction, implying an operation on the accumulator.

Immediate Addressing--In immediate addressing, the operand is contained in
the second byte of the instruction, with no further memory addressing
required.

Absolute Addressing--In absolute addressing, the second byte of the
instruction specifies the eight low order bits of the effective address while
the third byte specifies the eight high order bits.  Thus, the absolute
addressing mode allows access to the entire 64K bytes of addressable memory.

Zero Page Addressing--The zero page instructions allow for shorter code and
execution times by only fetching the second byte of the instruction and
assuming a zero high address byte.  Careful use of the zero page can result
in significant increase in code efficiency.

Indexed Zero Page Addressing--(X, Y indexing)--This form of addressing is
used in conjunction with the index register and is referred to as "Zero Page,
X" or "Zero Page, Y".  The effective address is calculated by adding the
second byte to the contents of the index register.  Since this is a form of
"Zero Page" addressing, the content of the second byte references a location
in page zero.  Additionally, due to the "Zero Page" addressing nature of this
mode, no carry is added to the high order eight bits of memory and crossing
of page boundaries does not occur.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "instruction_timing_and_opcode_table" which expands on Opcode formats and sizes for these addressing modes
