# MACHINE - Explanation of ASCII vs Commodore PET ASCII differences. Describes how PET graphics and text modes map to ASCII: numeric and punctuation largely match, but Commodore upper case letters map to PET lower case in text mode, etc. Gives rules for converting Commodore PETSCII to ASCII for transmission: (1) if < $3F transmit directly; (2) if between $40 and $5F OR with $20; (3) if between $C0 and $DF AND with $7F. Notes that equivalent rules exist for receiving from ASCII.

ASCII
-----

ASCII is the American Standard for Information Interchange.  It is the
standard for communications, and is often used with non-Commodore printers.

When a Commodore machine is in its graphic mode, its character set
corresponds closely to ASCII.  Numeric, upper case alphabetic, and
punctuation characters are the same.  A few control characters, such as
RETURN, also match.  Commodore graphics have no counterpart in ASCII.

When the Commodore machine is switched to text mode, the character set
diverges noticeably from ASCII.  Numeric characters and much of the
punctuation corresponds, but ASCII upper case alphabetic codes match the
Commodore computer's lower case codes.  Commodore's upper case alphabetics
are now completely out of the ASCII range, since ASCII is a seven-bit code.

As a result, Commodore's PET ASCII codes require conversion before
transmission to a true ASCII device or communications line.  This may be done
with either hardware interfacing or with a program.  Briefly, the procedure
is:

  1.  If the Commodore character is below $3F, it may be transmitted directly
      to the ASCII facility.

  2.  If the Commodore character is between $40 and $5F, it should be
      logically ORed with $20 (or add decimal 32) before transmission to
      ASCII.

  3.  If the Commodore character is between $C0 and $DF, it should be
      logically ANDed with $7F (or subtract decimal 128) before transmission
      to ASCII.

Equivalent rules can be derived to allow a Commodore computer to receive from
ASCII.  For either direction of transmission, some control characters may
require special treatment.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "appendix_d_petscii_table" which expands on full PETSCII mapping table for reference
