# ********* - Appendix A: Beginner's guide to typing in programs. Explains what a program is, BASIC programs, importance of exact typing (characters, punctuation, spacing), use of braces for special characters, DATA statements caveats (typos can crash machine), saving frequently, and a 'Get to Know Your Machine' checklist. Contains a short 'A Quick Review' checklist of typing and checking lines before running.


:::::::::::::::::::
::  Appendix A   ::
::               ::
:: A Beginner's  ::
::Guide to Typing::
::  In Programs  ::
:::::::::::::::::::

What Is a Program?

A computer cannot perform any task by itself.  Like a car without gas,
a computer has potential, but without a program, it isn't going
anywhere.  Most of the programs published in this book are written in
a computer language called BASIC.  BASIC is easy to learn and is built
into all Commodore 64s.

BASIC Programs

Computers can be picky.  Unlike the English language, which is full of
ambiguities, BASIC usually has only one right way of stating
something.  Every letter, character, or number is significant.  A
common mistake is substituting a letter such as O for the numeral 0, a
lowercase l for the numeral 1, or an uppercase B for the numeral 8.
Also, you must enter all punctuation such as colons and commas just as
they appears in the book.  Spacing can be important.  To be safe, type
in the listings exactly as they appear.

Braces and Special Characters

The exception to this typing rule is when you see the braces, such as
{DOWN}.  Anything within a set of braces is a special character or
characters that cannot easily by listed on a printer.  When you come
across such a special statement, refer to Appendix B, "How to Type In
Programs."

About DATA Statements

Some programs contain a section or sections of DATA statements.  These
lines provide information needed by the program.  Some DATA statements
contain actual programs (called machine language); others contain
graphics codes.  These lines are especially sensitive to errors.

If a single number in any one DATA statement is mistyped, your machine
could lock up, or crash.  The keyboard and STOP key may seem dead, and
the screen may go blank.  Don't panic--no damage is done.  To regain
control, you have to turn off your computer, then turn it back on.
This will erase whatever program was in memory, so always SAVE a copy
of your program before you RUN it.  If your computer crashes, you can
LOAD the program and look for your mistake.

Sometimes a mistyped DATA statement will cause an error message when
the program is RUN.  The error message may refer to the program line
that READs the data.  The error is still in the DATA statements,
though.

Get to Know Your Machine

You should familiarize yourself with your computer before attempting
to type in a program.  Learn the statements you use to store and
retrieve your programs from tape or disk.  You'll want to save a copy
of your program, so that you won't have to type it in every time you
want to use it.  Learn to use your machine's editing functions.  How
do you change a line if you made a mistake?  You can always retype the
line, but you at least need to know how to backspace.  Do you know how
to enter reverse video, lowercase, and control characters?  It's all
explained in your computer's manuals.

A Quick Review

1.  Type in the program a line at a time, in order.  Press RETURN at
the end of each line.  Use backspace or the back arrow to correct
mistakes

2.  Check the line you've typed against the line in the book.  You can
check the entire program again if you get an error when you RUN the
program.


