# ********* - Appendix B continued: Detailed descriptions of DOS error messages (note to ignore numbers <20 except 1), including READ/WRITE error explanations for codes 20–29 (headers, sync, data missing, checksum, decode errors, write-protect, ID mismatch), syntax and file-related errors 30–39, record/file size errors 50–66, and other DOS/drive errors up through 74. Guidance on causes and suggested diagnostics.


DESCRIPTION OF DOS ERROR MESSAGES

NOTE: Error message numbers less than 20 should be ignored with the
exception of 01 which gives information about the number of files
scratched with the SCRATCH command.

20: READ ERROR (block header not found) -- The disk controller is
unable to locate the header of the requested data block. Caused by an
illegal block number, or the header has been destroyed.

21: READ ERROR (no sync character) -- The disk controller is unable to
detect a sync mark on the desired track. Caused by misalignment of the
read/writer head, no diskette is present, or unformatted or improperly
seated diskette. Can also indicate a hardware failure.

22: READ ERROR (data block not present) -- The disk controller has
been requested to read or verify a data block that was not properly
written. This error message occurs in conjunction with the BLOCK
commands and indicates an illegal track and/or block request.

23: READ ERROR (checksum error in data block) -- This error message
indicates that there is an error in one or more of the data bytes. The
data has been read into the DOS memory, but the checksum over the data
is in error. This message may also indicate grounding problems.

24: READ ERROR (byte decoding error) -- The data or header as been
read into the DOS memory, but a hardware error has been created due to
an invalid bit pattern in the data byte. This message may also
indicate grounding problems.

25: WRITE ERROR (write-verify error) -- This message is generated if
the controller detects a mismatch between the written data and the
data in the DOS memory.

26: WRITE PROTECT ON -- This message is generated when the controller
has been requested to write a data block while the write protect
switch is depressed. Typically, this is caused by using a diskette
with a write a protect tab over the notch.

27: READ ERROR (checksum error in header) -- The controller has
detected an error in the header of the requested data block. The block
has not been read into the DOS memory.  This message may also indicate
grounding problems.

28: WRITE ERROR (long data block) -- The controller attempts to detect
the sync mark of the next header after writing a data block. If the
sync mark does not appear within a predetermined time, the error
message is generated.  The error is caused by a bad diskette format
(the data extends into the next block), or by hardware failure.

29: DISK ID MISMATCH -- This message is generated when the controller
has been requested to access a diskette which has not been initialized.
The message can also occur if a diskette has a bad header.

30: SYNTAX ERROR (general syntax) -- The DOS cannot interpret the
command sent to the command channel.  Typically, this is caused by an
illegal number of file names, or pattems are illegally used. For
example, two file names may appear on the left side of the COPY
command.

31: SYNTAX ERROR (invalid command) -- The DOS does not recognize the
command.  The command must start in the first position.

32: SYNTAX ERROR (invalid command) -- The command sent is longer than
58 characters.

33: SYNTAX ERROR (invalid file name) -- Pattem matching is invalidly
used in the OPEN or SAVE command.

34: SYNTAX ERROR (no file given) -- the file name was left out of a
command or the DOS does not recognize it as such.  Typically, a colon
(:) has been left out of the command,

39: SYNTAX ERROR (invalid command) -- This error may result if the
command sent to command channel (secondary address 15) is unrecognized

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "reading_error_channel_example_and_error_fields" which expands on use the BASIC error-channel reader to obtain the error code plus track and block for diagnosis
- "validate_command_defragment_and_caution_with_random_files" which expands on some errors (like file open/write or directory errors) are connected to improper file states that VALIDATE can address in some cases
