# COMMODORE 64 - Arrays: definition and conceptual description (tables of related elements referenced by a single name and subscripts). Supported types (integer, floating-point, string); dimensions and theoretical limits (up to 255 dimensions, 32767 elements per dimension), auto-creation rule for small one-dimensional arrays (<=10 elements) and memory calculation formula (5 bytes for array name + 2 bytes per dimension + per-element storage depending on type: 2 bytes int, 5 bytes float, 3+len string).


  INTEGER, FLOATING-POINT AND STRING ARRAYS

    An array is a table (or list) of associated data items referred to by
  a single variable name. In other words, an array is a sequence of related
  variables. A table of numbers can be seen as an array, for example.
  The individual numbers within the table become "elements" of the array.
    Arrays are a useful shorthand way of describing a large number of
  related variables. Take a table of numbers for instance. Let's say that
  the table has 10 rows of numbers with 20 numbers in each row. That makes
  total of 200 numbers in the table. Without a single array name to call
  on you would have to assign a unique name to each value in the table. But
  because you can use arrays you only need one name for the array and all
  the elements in the array are identified by their individual locations
  within the array.
    Array names can be integers, floating-points or string data types and
  all elements in the array have the same data type as the array name.
  Arrays can have a single dimension (as in a simple list) or they can have
  multiple dimensions (imagine a grid marked in rows and columns or a
  Rubik's Cube(R)). Each element of an array is uniquely identified and re-
  ferred to by a subscript (or index variable) following the array name,
  enclosed within parentheses ( ).
    The maximum number of dimensions an array can have in theory is 255
  and the number of elements in each dimension is limited to 32767. But
  for practical purposes array sizes are limited by the memory space
  available to hold their data and/or the 80 character logical screen line.
  If an array has only one dimension and its subscript value will never


  8   BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES
~


  exceed 1 0 (1 I items: 0 thru 1 0) then the array will be created by the
  Interpreter and filled with zeros (or nulls if string type) the first
  time any element of the array is referred to, otherwise the BASIC DIM
  statement must be used to define the shape and size of the array. The
  amount of memory required to store an array can be determined as follows:

                5 bytes for the array name
              + 2 bytes for each dimension of the array
              + 2 bytes per element for integers
           OR + 5 bytes per element for floating-point
           OR + 3 bytes per  element for strings
          AND + 1 byte per character in each string element

    Subscripts can be integer constants, variables, or an arithmetic ex-
  pression which gives an integer result. Separate subscripts, with com-
  mas between them, are required for each dimension of an array. Sub-
  scripts can have values from zero up to the number of elements in the
  respective dimensions of the array. Values outside that range will cause
  the BASIC error message ?BAD SUBSCRIPT. Some examples of array names,
  value assignments and data types are:

        A$(0)="GROSS SALES"     (string array)

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "dim_statement_and_memory_calculation" which expands on DIM statement syntax and memory calculation examples
