# Kick Assembler - Lists available asminfo selection options (Table 15.1) such as all, allPredefined, allSourceSpecific, version, libraries, directives, preprocessorDirectives, files, syntax, errors. Explains 'meta' category usage and what each selection returns.

When the category says 'meta' the option is used to select several of the sections. When the category is not
'meta' the option refers to a specific section. The details of the sections is given in later chapters.

15.2. Realtime feedback from the assembler
For writers of editors Kick Assembler has some special features which enables you to get info about the source
file while the user is editing it. This is done by calling Kick Assembler in strategic places like, when the user hasn't
typed anything for a given period of time.
First, the content of the one or several source files might not be saved. To get by this, save the content to a
temporary file and use the replaceFile option to substitute the content of the original file:
java -jar KickAss.jar mysource.asm -replacefile c:\ka\mysource.asm c:\tmp
\tmpSource.asm

This replaces the content of the first file with the second. It doesn't matter if the file is the main file or included
by another filer, and your can have as many replaceFile options as you want.
Secondly, you don't want Kick Assembler to do a complete assembling each time you call it. It might take
too much time to assemble and you don't want the assembler to overwrite output. To take care of this, use the noeval option.
java -jar KickAss.jar mysource.asm -noeval ...

This make Kick Assembler parse the source file and do an initial pass, no evaluation will be done. This will
detect syntax errors and return syntax information.

15.3. The AsmInfo file format
The assembly info files is divided into sections. If the first char of a line is '[' it marks a new section, and the
name of the section is written between square brackets. Each line consist of one or more semicolon separated
fields. Notice that in special cases, the last field might contain a semicolon itself (This will be noted in the involved
sections). So the basic file format looks like this:
[section1]
field1;field2;field3
field1;field2;field3
field1;field2;field3

72

Assemble Information

[section2]
field1;field2
field1;field2
field1;field2

As special type of field, which is used in several sections is a 'source range' which describes a range of chars
in a source file. It consist of 5 integers:
startline, startposition, endline, endposition, fileindex

The positions is the positions in a given line. The file index tell which file it is and is an index pointing to an
entry in the files section. An example of a source range is:
38,8,38,17,1

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "asminfo_option_and_output_format" which expands on how to request different sections
