# Contents - Definition of assembly language: mnemonics translated by an assembler to machine code once before running; benefits include speed, direct hardware access, control, and improved readability through named memory locations and variables.

ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE 

The alternative to these two extremes is to pro- 
gram in assembly language. Assembly language is 
a language that uses an assembler that translates 
the mneumonics (memory aids) for the CPU's in- 
struction set into the binary data that the processor 
can execute. This translation takes place once before 
the program is run, so the final program will be 
machine code. You end up with all of the speed ad- 
vantages of a machine language program with none 
of the headaches. A properly written assembly 
language program is just as efficient as its machine 
language counterpart, so there is no reason to pro- 
gram in machine language if you can gain access 
to an assembler. 

With an assembly language program, the pro- 
grammer normally has more than enough time to 
do all of the calculations and updates to keep the 
animation constant and smooth. The program can 
also make use of all of the hardware features of the 
computer to create effects that are not possible 
through BASIC. When you are using assembly 
language, the computer is completely under soft- 
ware control, making it possible to determine what 
the computer is doing at all times. An assembly 
language program executes faster than any other 
type of program, which makes assembly language 
the language of choice for programming games. 

Learning to program in assembly language is 
not as traumatic an experience as most program- 
mers would have you believe. Unlike BASIC, the 
machine will always be doing exactly what you tell 
it to do. The main difference between BASIC and 
assembly language is that in assembly language you 
must keep track of where the data is in memory and 
where it must go. BASIC keeps track of variables 
for you, but it won't tell you where they are. In 
assembly language, you can define various memory 
locations so that they have some meaning to you. 

For instance, you could define $20 to be the 
player horizontal position. ($ indicates a hexadecimal 
number; $20 is equal to 32 in the decimal system. 



See Chapter 3 for more information.) Whenever you 

need to find out what the horizontal position is or 
need to modify it, you would look into location $20. 
You can create your own variables in BASIC using 
the same technique. You would POKE the value in- 
to $20 and PEEK it back out whenever you needed 
it. This is a particularly useful technique when you 
mix BASIC and assembly language, because each 
program will know where to find the data from the 
other program. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "using_an_assembler_pseudo_opcodes" which expands on assembler features and pseudo-opcodes used in book
- "machine_language_overview" which expands on assembly gives the speed of machine language with programmer-friendly syntax
