# byRiclianll - Explains alternate format for B-A, notes why OPEN/CLOSE of a direct-access channel is important (BAM rewrite to disk on close), and discusses that the BAM is updated on-the-fly but erratically — recommends open/close discipline. Also explains odd behavior of errors when saving to a full disk and how allocated blocks are freed only by validation; allocated directory sectors are never deallocated by DOS automatically.

Line  Range  Description 


150  Open  a  direct-access  channel. 

160  Initialize  track  to  1. 

170  Initialize  sector  to  0. 

180  Block-allocate  command. 

190  Query  error  channel. 

200  The  track  and  sector  were  not  allocated. 

210  Something  is  amiss  so  bail  out. 

220  Counter  representing  the  number  of  sectors  allocated  in 

line  170. 

230  Print  track,  sector,  counter. 

240  The  sector  just  allocated  already  was  but  the  DOS 

returns  the  next  available  track  in  the  error  message  (65, 

NO  BLOCK,  track,  sector). 
250  If  the  next  available  track  is  zero  then  all  683  blocks  on 

the  diskette  have  been  allocated. 
260  Don't  allocate  the  directory. 

270  The  DOS  returns  the  next  available  sector  in  the  error 

message  (65,  NO  BLOCK,  track,  sector). 
280  Allocate  the  next  available  track  and  sector. 

290  Close  the  direct-access  channel. 

330-370  Error  handler. 


The  alternate  format  of  the  block-allocate  command  in  line  180  is: 
PRINT#15, "B-a: " ; O; T; s 

The  opening  of  a  direct-access  channel  Qine  150)  is  standard  form.  Why?  Because  the 
BAM  is  rewritten  to  a  diskette  when  a  direct-access  data  channel  is  closed  fline  290). 


90 


In  reality,  though,  the  BAM  is  updated  on  the  fly  but  very  erratically.  Thus,  opening 
and  closing  a  direct-access  data  channel  is  a  good  habit  to  get  into.  An  ounce  of 
prevention  .  .  . 

By  the  way,  what  happens  when  you  try  to  save  to  a  full  disk?  Error  72,  DISK  FULL 
right?  Would  you  believe  error  67,  ILLEGAL  TRACK  OR  SECTOR,36,01?  Track  36? 
That's  right.  An  error  72  only  occurs  during  normal  viTite  mode  (i.e.,  not  a  direct-access 
write)  where  at  least  1  free  block  exists  at  the  outset  or  the  directory  is  at  its  physical 
limit,  i.e.,  144  active  file  entries. 

A  block  remains  allocated  until  a  diskette  is  validated.  Unless  a  given  track  and  sector 
somehow  chains  to  a  directory  entry  its  bit  will  be  freed  (1)  during  validation.  (See  the 
validate  command  in  Chapter  2.)  Caution  must  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  block-allocate 
command  does  not  allocate  an  unused  sector  in  the  directory.  See  line  260  above.  Once 
a  sector  has  been  allocated  in  the  directory,  it  is  never  deallocated  by  the  DOS,  even 
during  a  validate.  An  allocated  directory  sector  can  only  be  freed  under  software  control. 

The  following  program  makes  use  of  the  block-allocate  command  to  certify  a  formatted 
diskette.  A  worst-case  binary  pattern  is  written  to  any  sector  not  currently  in  use.  Bad 
sectors,  if  any,  are  allocated  in  the  BAM.  However,  these  bad  sectors  will  be  deallocated 
if  the  diskette  is  ever  validated.  (Sorry,  but  that's  the  nature  of  the  beast.) 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "block_allocate_program" which expands on why the program opens/closes the direct-access channel repeatedly
- "bam_and_bam_handling_notes" which expands on further detail about persistence of allocated directory sectors and validation
