# byRiclianll - Explains the interaction when B-R reads a sector previously rewritten by Block-Write (B-W): the EOI is tied to the ASCII value of byte 0 (which B-W overwrites with the buffer-pointer position), destroying the forward-track link and limiting readable characters to that byte's value. Advises changing the track parameter in the demo (line 160) and recommends using the Ul command instead of B-R; notes manuals often ignore Ul or don't explain its use.



What's  even  more  problematic  is  the  situation  that  occurs  when  you  do  a  block-read 
(B-R)  of  a  track  and  sector  that  was  rewritten  by  the  block-write  command  (B-W)  which 
is  discussed  below.  The  EOI  occurs  in  connection  with  the  ASCII  value  of  the  0th  byte 
of  the  sector  that  was  read.  Byte  0  contains  the  value  of  the  buffer-pointer  position  at 
the  time  the  block  was  written  with  a  block-write  command  (B-W).  The  forward  track 
reference  that  was  originally  there,  has  been  destroyed.  The  ASCII  value  of  the  0th 
byte  determines  how  many  characters  you  can  access  before  the  EOI  occurs.  Run  the 
block-read  (B-R)  program  listed  above  against  track  1,  sector  0  after  you've  done  the 
block-write  (B-W)  experiment  listed  below  on  a  test  disk.  Change  the  track  number  in 
line  160  from  an  18  to  a  1  like  this: 

160  PRINT#15, "B-R";2;0; l;0 

After  further  experimentation  on  your  own,  you  should  have  little  trouble  understand- 
ing why  the  Ul  command  replaces  the  block-read  command  (B-R).  Not  only  do  user 
manuals  continue  to  promote  the  use  of  the  block-read  command  (B-R),  but  they  also 
either  ignore  the  Ul  command  altogether  or  simply  mention  it  in  passing  without  even 
a  hint  on  how  to  use  it. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "block_read_demo_program" which expands on indicates which line (line 160) to change in the demo program to observe the effect
- "block_write_behavior_and_demo_program" which expands on explains how B-W writes the buffer-pointer into byte 0 and breaks links
