# Contents - High-level description of Commodore 64 hardware sections: CPU (6510), Memory (64K DRAM + 20K ROM), Video generation (6567 VIC-II), Sound (6581 SID), and I/O (two 6526 CIAs). Notes on bank switching, memory mapping, and which chips programs will typically control (VIC-II and SID).

THE HARDWARE 

Like all computers, the Commodore 64 is made 
of a number of complex integrated circuit chips. You 
can conceptualize the internal workings of the com- 
puter as being broken down into 5 different sections: 



10 



Central processing unit 

Memory 

Video generation 

Sound 

Input and Output 

In the Commodore 64, the central processing 
unit (CPU) is a 6510 microprocessor chip. It ex- 
ecutes the same instruction set as a 6502 
microprocessor as used in Apple and ATARI com- 
puters. It runs with a clock frequency of 1.0225 
MHz. For all practical purposes, this can be con- 
sidered to be a 1 MHz clock. The 6510 has an ad- 
dressing range of 65536 bytes (64K). 

There are two different types of memory in the 
Commodore 64. It has 64K of dynamic RAM, which 
can be banked into the address space of the other 
chips as necessary. There is also 20K of ROM in 
the system. In this ROM are the BASIC program- 
ming language and the operating system of the 
Commodore 64. The operating system is responsi- 
ble for reading the keyboard, updating the real-time 
clock, and transferring data in and out of the system, 
among other things. Since the CPU can only address 
64K of memory, all of the RAM cannot be access- 
ed simultaneously with all of the ROM. To overcome 
this problem, the technique of bank switching is 
used. For instance, if you are not using BASIC, 
there is no need for the BASIC ROM to be accessi- 
ble. In this case, it can be replaced with RAM. The 
CPU cannot tell the difference, so it can be "trick- 
ed" into addressing more then 64K of memory. 

Video generation is a task that is taken care of 
by a 6567 Video Interface chip (VIC II). All of the 
various graphic modes of the Commodore 64 are 
generated by this chip. In the process of generating 
the video signal, the VIC-II chip refreshes the 
dynamic ram chips used in the system. The VIC-II 
chip also generates the system clock from the 8.18 
MHz dot clock. 

Sound is generated by a 6591 Sound Interface 
Device chip (SID). This chip can generate 3 indepen- 
dent voices each in a frequency range of to 4 kHz. 
This corresponds to a range of about 9 octaves. Each 
voice has an independent volume envelope and a 
choice of waveforms. The SID chip can also provide 



a number of filtering options for use with its own 
signals or an externally supplied signal. 

Input and output functions are handles primari- 
ly by a pair of 6526 Complex Interface Adapter chips. 
Serial communication functions as well as the 
parallel port are maintained by these chips. They 
also handle input from the joysticks and the real 
time clock. These chips each provide a pair of in- 
dependent 16-bit timers. 

If you understand how these four devices work, 
you can make the computer do anything it is capable 
of. Your program will be primarily concerned with 
the VIC-II chip and the SID chip. The CPU is the 
chip that the program is written for, and it is 
directed to modify the registers in the other chips 
at the appropriate time for the intended function. 
Writing almost any type of program eventually 
comes down to controlling just a few chips. Once 
you control the major chips the rest of the program 
should be easy. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "6510_architecture_and_registers" which expands on details of 6510 registers and stack
- "graphics_memory_locations_and_vic_bank_selection" which expands on VIC-II can see only one 16K bank at a time
- "color_memory" which expands on color RAM and how VIC-II uses it
