# MACHINE - Description of the C (carry / greater-or-equal) flag: meaning after comparisons, behavior in arithmetic, which instructions affect it (compare and arithmetic), branch instructions BCS/BCC, and direct set/clear via SEC and CLC. Notes on substituting branches (BNE vs BCC) in example loops.

C Flag
------

The C (carry) flag is probably misnamed, too.  It should have been called the
GE (greater/equal) flag, since after a comparison (CPX, CPY or CMP), the C
flag is set "on" if the register (X, Y, or A) is greater than or equal to the
value compared.  If the register concerned is smaller, the C flag will be
reset "off."

The C flag is not as busy as the Z flag.  The C flag is affected only by
comparison instructions and by arithmetic activities (add, subtract, and a
type of multiplication and division called rotate or shift).  When used in
arithmetic, the C flag is properly named, since it acts as a "carry" bit
between various columns as they are calculated.  For example, an LDA
instruction always affects the Z flag since a register is being changed, but
never affects the C flag since no arithmetic or comparison is being
performed.

If the C flag is set "on," the BCS (branch carry set) instruction will branch
to the specified address; otherwise it will be ignored and the next
instruction in sequence will be executed.  If the C flag is reset "off," the
BCC (branch carry clear) instruction will branch.

The C flag may be directly set or reset by means of the instructions SEC (set
carry) and CLC (clear carry).  We will use these instructions when we begin
to deal with addition and subtraction.

If you examine the last program of Chapter 2, you will see that the BNE
instruction could be replaced by BCC.  Instead of "branch back if not equal
to 6," we could code "branch back if less than 6."  The operation would be
the same in either case.



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "flags_introduction_and_z_flag" which expands on Related Z flag behavior and compare/branch examples
- "v_flag_and_overflow" which expands on Contrast with V flag for signed overflow
