# CA65 Assembler - Control Commands (.CHARMAP .CODE .CONDES .CONSTRUCTOR .DATA)

11.17 .DBYT
Define word sized data with the hi and lo bytes swapped (use .WORD to create word sized data in native 65XX format). Must be followed by a sequence of (word ranged) expressions.

Example:


        .dbyt   $1234, $4512
  
This will emit the bytes


        $12 $34 $45 $12
  
into the current segment in that order.

11.18 .DEBUGINFO
Switch on or off debug info generation. The default is off (that is, the object file will not contain debug infos), but may be changed by the -g switch on the command line. The command can be followed by a '+' or '-' character to switch the option on or off respectively.

Example:


        .debuginfo      +       ; Generate debug info
  
11.19 .DEFINE
Start a define style macro definition. The command is followed by an identifier (the macro name) and optionally by a list of formal arguments in parentheses.

Please note that .DEFINE shares most disadvantages with its C counterpart, so the general advice is, NOT do use .DEFINE if you don't have to.

See also the .UNDEFINE command and section Macros.

11.20 .DELMAC, .DELMACRO
Delete a classic macro (defined with .MACRO) . The command is followed by the name of an existing macro. Its definition will be deleted together with the name. If necessary, another macro with this name may be defined later.

See: .ENDMACRO, .EXITMACRO, .MACRO

See also section Macros.

11.21 .DESTRUCTOR
Export a symbol and mark it as a module destructor. This may be used together with the linker to build a table of destructor subroutines that are called by the startup code.

Note: The linker has a feature to build a table of marked routines, but it is your code that must call these routines, so just declaring a symbol as constructor does nothing by itself.

A destructor is always exported as an absolute (16 bit) symbol. You don't need to use an additional .export statement, this is implied by .destructor. It may have an optional priority that is separated by a comma. Higher numerical values mean a higher priority. If no priority is given, the default priority of 7 is used. Be careful when assigning priorities to your own module destructors so they won't interfere with the ones in the cc65 library.

Example:


        .destructor     ModuleDone
        .destructor     ModDone, 16
  
See the .CONDES and .CONSTRUCTOR commands and the separate section Module constructors/destructors explaining the feature in more detail.

11.22 .DWORD
Define dword sized data (4 bytes) Must be followed by a sequence of expressions.

Example:


        .dword  $12344512, $12FA489
  
