# Contents - CENTIPEDE overview and translation strategy: centipede of 11 segments that breaks apart when hit; mushrooms, spiders, fleas, and scorpions affect play. Mushrooms can be multicolor programmable characters. Because many moving objects are required (11 segments + player + shot + flea + spider + scorpion = 16 sprites), use sprite multiplexing (tricking the VIC-II into appearing to have more sprites) to display the necessary sprites.

CENTIPEDE 

In CENTIPEDE, a nasty centipede is running 
loose in a field of mushrooms. It starts at the top 
of the screen and winds its way down the screen 
until it gets to the bottom, where the player's gun 
is. The players must shoot the centipede without 
getting hit by it. The centipede has 1 1 body 
segments. If the head is hit, the next body segment 
becomes the new head. If a body segment is hit, 
the centipede breaks into two parts, each of which 
has its own head. Whenever a segment of the cen- 
tipede hits a mushroom, it drops down to the next 
line and turns around. 

In addition to the centipede, the player must 
also avoid the spiders and fleas. Fleas add to the 
mushroom field, while spiders destroy mushrooms. 
Scorpions poison the mushrooms that they touch. 
A poisoned mushroom causes the centipede to de- 
scend straight down the screen. 



58 



This game could be a bit of a problem to 
translate because of the large number of moving ob- 
jects. The mushrooms can be made using multicolor 
programmable characters. Since the Commodore 64 
has only eight sprites to work with, there would ap- 
pear to be a shortage of sprites to use in the transla- 
tion. However, by using the technique of sprite 
multiplexing, you can trick the computer into work- 
ing as if it had 16 sprites. This technique is dis- 
cussed further in a later chapter; if used properly, 
it would allow the game to be translated for the 
Commodore 64. Eleven sprites are used for the cen- 
tipede's segments, 1 sprite for the player, 1 sprite 
for the shot, 1 for the flea, 1 for the spider, and 1 
for the scorpion. This totals 16 sprites, or the 
number of sprites that multiplexing would provide. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sprite_multiplexing_benefits" which expands on details on sprite multiplexing technique for C64
