# Contents - Introduction to Chapter 7: deep technical details for programming VIC-II and SID chips, naming conventions for hardware registers (SYSDEF), and mention of macros provided in Appendix B/C for common functions.

Chapter 7 
Technical Information 



Up until now, this book has dealt with concepts and 
generalities when referring to the hardware in the 
Commodore 64. This was important to get you 
used to the capabilities of the hardware without bog- 
ging you down with details. This chapter will go into 
the details of getting the computer to generate the 
effects you are after. This chapter will probably be 
the chapter to which you will refer most often when 
writing a game program. All of the information that 
you will need in order to program the VIC II chips 
and the SID chip will be explained in this chapter. 
After you have become familiar with the hardware 
in the Commodore 64, you will not need the full ex- 
planation of the hardware registers. When you are 
up to such a level, you will find it easier to use the 
listing of the S YSDEF file in Appendix C as a quick 
reference guide to the registers. 

Unless otherwise noted, all references to ad- 
dresses in this chapter use hexadecimal notation. 
The names that have been assigned to the registers 
are the standard names that have been defined in 
the hardware definition listing, SYSDEF (Listing 
C-2 in Appendix C). By using this naming conven- 



tion for the registers, you will begin to gain familiari- 
ty with the register names as they are used in the 
assembler. All of the names are made up of 6 
characters or less, so no matter what type of 
assembler you are using, the same names will be 
acceptable. 

Macros that supply many of the functions 
described below have been provided. Descriptions 
of all of the macros can be found in Appendix B, 
and Listing C- 1 in Appendix C provides the source 
code. The macros may use a few more instructions 
to perform the function than would be required if 
you were to provide the data yourself. They do have 
advantages, however. Your program will be easier 
to understand if you use the macros, as there will 
be a recognizable name given to the macro as op- 
posed to a sequence of assembly language in- 
structions. 




---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "graphics_memory_locations_and_vic_bank_selection" which expands on VIC-II graphics memory mapping
- "color_memory" which expands on color RAM and how graphics modes interpret it
