# COMMODORE 64 - Explanation of CBM BASIC keywords: how abbreviations work (type enough letters then SHIFT on last letter), that abbreviations are tokenized (do not save memory in saved programs), built-in function argument rules (parentheses directly after keyword, no space), and that string-returning functions end with '$'.



  INTRODUCTION

  This chapter explains CBM BASIC Language keywords. First we give you an
  easy to read list of keywords, their abbreviations and what each letter
  looks like on the screen. Then we explain how the syntax and operation of
  each keyword works in detail, and examples are shown to give you an idea
  as to how to use them in your programs.
    As a convenience, Commodore 64 BASIC allows you to abbreviate most
  keywords. Abbreviations are entered by typing enough letters of the
  keyword to distinguish it from all other keywords, with the last letter
  or graphics entered holding down the <SHIFT> key.
    Abbreviations do NOT save any memory when they're used in programs,
  because all keywords are reduced to single-character "tokens" by the
  BASIC Interpreter. When a program containing abbreviations is listed, all
  keywords appear in their fully spelled form. You can use abbreviations to
  put more statements onto a program line even if they won't fit onto the
  80-character logical screen line. The Screen Editor works on an 80-
  character line. This means that if you use abbreviations on any line that
  goes over 80 characters, you will NOT be able to edit that line when
  LISTed. Instead, what you'll have to do is (1) retype the entire line
  including all abbreviations, or (2) break the single line of code into
  two lines, each with its own line number, etc.
    A complete list of keywords, abbreviations, and their appearance on the
  screen is presented in Table 2-1. They are followed by an alphabetical
  description of all the statements, commands, and functions available on
  your Commodore 64.
    This chapter also explains the BASIC functions built into the BASIC
  Language Interpreter. Built-in functions can be used in direct mode
  statements or in any program, without having to define the function
  further. This is NOT the case with user-defined functions. The results of
  built-in BASIC functions can be used as immediate output or they can be
  assigned to a variable name of an appropriate type. There are two types
  of BASIC functions:

    1) NUMERIC
    2) STRING

    Arguments of built-in functions are always enclosed in parentheses ().
  The parentheses always come directly after the function keyword and NO
  SPACES between the last letter of the keyword and the left parenthesis (.



  30   BASIC LANGUAGE VOCABULARY
~


    The type of argument needed is generally decided by the data type in
  the result. Functions which return a string value as their result are
  identified by having a dollar sign ($) as the last character of the
  keyword. In some cases string functions contain one or more numeric
  argument. Numeric functions will convert between integer and floating-
  point format as needed. In the descriptions that follow, the data type of
  the value returned is shown with each function name. The types of argu-
  ments are also given with the statement format.

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "how_to_use_syntax_conventions" which expands on syntax rules for parentheses and spacing
