# COMMODORE 64 - Introduction to Chapter 1: what the chapter covers (how BASIC stores/manipulates data), and a short description of the Commodore 64 Operating System components: BASIC interpreter, KERNAL, Screen Editor and their responsibilities (keyword vocabulary, I/O handling, editing/keyboard interception).

  INTRODUCTION

    This chapter talks about how BASIC stores and manipulates data. The
  topics include:

    1) A brief mention of the operating system components and functions
       as well as the character set used in the Commodore 64.
    2) The formation of constants and variables. What types of variables
       there are. And how constants and variables are stored in memory.
    3) The rules for arithmetic calculations, relationship tests, string
       handling, and logical operations. Also included are the rules for
       forming expressions, and the data conversions necessary when you're
       using BASIC with mixed data types.

  SCREEN DISPLAY CODES (BASIC CHARACTER SET)

  THE OPERATING SYSTEM (OS)

    The Operating System is contained in the Read Only Memory (ROM) chips
  and is a combination of three separate, but interrelated, program
  modules.

    1) The BASIC Interpreter
    2) The KERNAL
    3) The Screen Editor

    1) The BASIC Interpreter is responsible for analysing BASIC statement
       syntax and for performing the required calculations and/or data
       manipulation. The BASIC Interpreter has a vocabulary of 65
       "keywords" which have special meanings. The upper and lower case
       alphabet and the digits 0-9 are used to make both keywords and
       variable names. Certain punctuation characters and special symbols
       also have meanings for the Interpreter. Table 1-1 lists the special
       characters and their uses.
    2) The KERNAL handles most of the interrupt level processing in the
       system (for details on interrupt level processing, see Chapter 5).
       The KERNAL also does the actual input and output of data.
    3) The Screen Editor controls the output to the video screen (tele-
       vision set) and the editing of BASIC program text. In addition, the
       Screen Editor intercepts keyboard input so that it can decide
       whether the characters put in should be acted upon immediately, or
       passed on to the BASIC Interpreter.

  2  BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "basic_keywords_table" which expands on Interpreter's vocabulary of BASIC keywords
- "kernal_overview" which expands on KERNAL routines and usage (Chapter 5)
