# An Introduction to Programming C-64 Demos - Character graphics basics: custom charsets for better-looking text/graphics. Screen memory default at $0400 (size $03E8), colour RAM is fixed at $D800 (per-character colours). Example: to show 'A' in upper-left, poke screen code to $0400 and colour value to $D800.

Character Graphics
Sprites isn't the only way to display graphics. Our next topic is character graphics. You might have tried to draw something using the built-in character set. That's not very easy, and the results usually aren't all that good. Of course, you don't have to use the built-in character set. Using a character set editor, you can draw your own character set, and more effects than you can imagine are implemented using character graphics. They don't even have to look like characters, if the trick is (as it often is) to update the character set in realtime.

Before we get into those kinds of tricks, we'll do what we usually do and go through the basics first.


Screen and Colour RAM
As you should already know (from reading the section on learning ML), you change characters on the screen by putting the character values into screen memory. Screen memory is $03e8 bytes long and is located at $0400, unless you move it somewhere else. The screen codes aren't the same as the PETSCII codes you use for normal text, so if you want to prepare text that should be put on the screen, make sure you save it as screen codes. Most demo related text editors and such already do that, so there's nothing to worry about.

Now, putting characters on the screen is cool, but it gets even cooler if you can give each character its own colour. You can do this by poking the colour values into colour RAM, which is always located at $d800 (you can't move it).

So, let's say you want the letter A to appear in the upper left corner of the screen, and you want it to be yellow. What do you do? You poke the screen code for A into screen memory, ie. put the value 1 into memory position $0400, and put the value for yellow, which is 7, in $d800.



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "changing_charset_and_d018" which expands on pointing character set and screen memory via $D018
