# COMMODORE 64 - CIOUT: low-level transmit of one byte over the serial bus using full handshaking. Includes purpose, call address ($FFA8 / 65448), preparatory routines (LISTEN and SECOND if needed), communication register (A), stack/register notes, detailed behavior (puts byte on bus using handshaking, device must be listening or a timeout status results, routine buffers one character which is sent with EOI on UNLSN), usage steps, and a short example (LDA #'X' ; JSR CIOUT).

  B-6. Function Name: CIOUT

    Purpose: Transmit a byte over the serial bus
    Call address: $FFA8 (hex) 65448 (decimal)
    Communication registers: A
    Preparatory routines: LISTEN, [SECOND]
    Error returns: See READST
    Stack requirements: 5
    Registers affected: None

    Description: This routine is used to send information to devices on the
  serial bus. A call to this routine will put a data byte onto the serial
  bus using full serial handshaking. Before this routine is called, the
  LISTEN KERNAL routine must be used to command a device on the serial bus
  to get ready to receive data. (If a device needs a secondary address, it
  must also be sent by using the SECOND KERNAL routine.) The accumulator is
  loaded with a byte to handshake as data on the serial bus. A device must
  be listening or the status word will return a timeout. This routine
  always buffers one character. (The routine holds the previous character
  to be sent back.) So when a call to the KERNAL UNLSN routine is made to
  end the data transmission, the buffered character is sent with an End Or
  Identify (EOI) set. Then the UNLSN command is sent to the device.






                                            BASIC TO MACHINE LANGUAGE   279
~


  How to Use:

    0) Use the LISTEN KERNAL routine (and the SECOND routine if needed).
    1) Load the accumulator with a byte of data.
    2) Call this routine to send the data byte.

  EXAMPLE:


    LDA #'X       ;SEND AN X TO THE SERIAL BUS
    JSR CIOUT



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "chkout_open_output_channel" which expands on higher-level channel setup that causes the device to LISTEN before using CIOUT
- "acptr_get_byte_from_serial_bus_full_handshake" which expands on complementary serial read routine that uses full handshaking to receive bytes
