# - C64 I/O Map (Mapping The Commodore 64) - Color RAM usage in different graphics modes: for text it holds per-character foreground color; in multicolor text character values >7 enable multicolor mode (low 3 bits used); in hi-res bitmap Color RAM not used (bitmap uses separate color map); in multicolor bitmap and multicolor text behavior differs. Notes about OS behavior in newer C64s setting Color RAM to background color on screen clear, and using color mapping to hide/reveal text.

                          Color mapping affords a convenient method of changing the color of the
                          text display without changing the letters.  By POKEing the appropriate
                          section of Color RAM, you can change the color of a whole section of
                          text on the screen without affecting the content of the text.  You can
                          even use this method to make letters disappear by changing their
                          foreground colors to match the background (or by changing the
                          background to match the foreground), and later make them reappear by
                          changing them back, or by changing the background to a contrasting
                          color.  An interesting example program which changes Color RAM quickly
                          in BASIC can be found under the entry for 648 ($288).

                          A change in the Operating System causes newer 64s to set all of the
                          Color RAM locations to the same value as the current background color
                          whenever the screen is cleared.  Therefore, POKEing character codes to
                          the Screen RAM area will not appear to have any effect, because the
                          letters will be the same color as the background.  This can easily be
                          turned to your advantage, however, because it means that all you have
                          to do to set all of Color RAM to a particular value is to set the
                          background color to that value (using the register at 53281 ($D021)),
                          clear the screen, and return the background color in the desired
                          value.

                          The various graphics modes use this area differently than does the
                          regular text mode.  In high-resolution bitmap mode, this area is not
                          used at all, but in multicolor bitmap mode it is used to determine the
                          color of the 11 bit-pair for a given 8 by 8 dot area.

                          In multicolor text mode, only the lowest three bits are used, so only
                          colors 0-7 may be selected.  The fourth bit is used to determine
                          whether a character will be displayed in regular text or multicolor
                          text.  Characters with a color value over 7 are displayed as
                          multicolor characters, with the color of the 11 bit-pair determined by
                          the color value minus 8.  Characters with a color value under 8 are
                          displayed normally.

                          It should be noted that unlike the Screen RAM area, which can be moved
                          to any RAM location, the Color RAM area is fixed, and will function
                          normally regardless of where screen memory is located.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "bitmap_multicolor_plotting_and_sample" which expands on Color RAM usage in multicolor bitmap mode
