# byRiclianll - Section 2.2: Three ways the C64/VIC-20 communicates with the 1541: (1) LOAD/SAVE/VERIFY BASIC commands, (2) I/O via the command channel (channel 15), and (3) I/O via data communication channels for file read/write. Introduces focus on the command channel for the rest of the manual.

2.2  Communicating  witli  tlie  1541 

Your  Commodore  64  or  VIC-20  can  communicate  with  your  1541  disk  drive  in  several 
ways: 

1.  Through  the  LOAD,  SAVE,  and  VERIFY  commands. 

2.  Through  I/O  using  the  command  channel. 

3.  Through  I/O  using  data  communication  channels. 


15 


Let's  examine  each  of  these  in  greater  detail. 

1.  LOAD,  SAVE,  and  VERIFY  commands: 

These  BASIC  commands  are  used  to  store  and  retrieve  programs  on  the  Commodore 
tape  and  disk  drives.  They  are  designed  for  ease  of  use,  even  by  the  novice.  The  BASIC 
interpreter  in  the  computer  interprets  these  commands  and  sends  the  disk  drive  the 
necessary  information  over  the  serial  bus. 

2.  I/O  using  the  command  channel: 

The  command  channel  is  used  to  send  messages  to  the  disk  drive  to  carry  out  disk  opera- 
tions like:  formatting  a  blank  diskette,  erasing  an  unwanted  file,  renaming  a  file,  etc. 
These  operations  are  often  referred  to  as  disk  housekeeping.  The  command  channel  is 
also  used  to  input  messages,  such  as  the  current  error  status  of  the  drive,  generated 
by  the  DOS.  For  more  details  on  how  to  use  the  command  channel,  see  Section  2.4. 

3.  I/O  using  data  communication  channels: 

The  1541  DOS  supports  a  variety  of  kinds  of  files:  program  files,  sequential  files,  relative 
files,  user  files,  and  direct-access  files.  The  storage  and  retrieval  of  information  in  files 
is  carried  out  using  a  data  communication  channel.  Although  this  manual  provides  detailed 
information  regarding  how  files  are  stored  and  organized,  no  attempt  is  made  to  teach 
you  how  to  develop  programs  that  make  extensive  use  of  file  handling.  We  would  en- 
courage readers  who  are  interested  in  file  handling  techniques  to  refer  to  Jim  Butter- 
field's  series  of  articles  in  COMPUTE!.  The  only  I/O  applications  discussed  in  this  manual 
are  those  relating  to  direct-access  programming  (see  Chapter  5). 

Since  the  rest  of  this  manual  makes  extensive  use  of  the  command  channel,  let's  ex- 
amine it  in  some  detail. 

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "command_channel_functions" which expands on what the command channel is used for
- "direct_access_programming_overview" which expands on data channels and direct-access programming (Chapter 5)
