# COMMODORE 64 - Information on Commodore publications and support: POWER/PLAY magazine (consumer/entertainment), COMMODORE magazine (technical), subscription info and how to get more resources and user club support.

                                                          INTRODUCTION   xv
~


  SIMULATIONS             Computer simulations let you conduct dangerous
                          or expensive experiments at minimum risk and
                          cost.

  SPORTS DATA             The Source (TM) and CompuServe (TM) both offer
                          sports information which you can get using
                          your COMMODORE 64 and a VICMODEM.

  STOCK QUOTES            With a VICMODEM and a subscription to any of the
                          appropriate network services, your COMMODORE 64
                          becomes your own private stock ticker.

    These are just a few of the many applications for you and your
  COMMODORE 64. As you can see, for work or play, at home, in school
  or the office, your COMMODORE 64 gives you a practical solution for
  just about any need.
    Commodore wants you to know that our support for users only STARTS
  with your purchase of a Commodore computer. That's why we've created
  two publications with Commodore information from around the world, and
  a "two-way" computer information network with valuable input for users
  in the U.S. and Canada from coast to coast.
    In addition, we wholeheartedly encourage and support the growth of
  Commodore Users' Clubs around the world. They are an excellent source
  of information for every Commodore computer owner from the beginner
  to the most advanced. The magazines and network, which are more fully
  described below, have the most up-to-date information about how to get
  involved with the Users' Club in your area.
    Finally, your local Commodore dealer is a useful source of Commodore
  support and information.

  POWER/PLAY
  The Home Computer Magazine

    When it comes to entertainment, learning at home and practical home
  applications, POWER/PLAY is THE prime source of information for Com-
  modore home users. Find out where your nearest user clubs are and
  what they're doing, learn about software, games, programming techniques,
  telecommunications, and new products. POWER/PLAY is your personal
  connection to other Commodore users, outside software and hardware
  developers, and to Commodore itself. Published quarterly. Only $10.00
  for a year of home computing excitement.

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "commodore_information_network" which expands on paperless magazine and online support
