# Contents - Custom character sets: each character defined as 8x8 bits stored as eight sequential bytes (one byte per row). To redefine characters, place 8-byte character definitions in RAM on a $0800 boundary within the current bank, then set VIDBAS to point to them. When VIC uses RAM-based character generator, its ROM is no longer used; first 8 bytes of your set will be displayed if you write corresponding character codes into text RAM.

CUSTOM CHARACTER SETS 

Although the Commodore 64 has a built in 
character set, you will probably find that set limiting 
in what it allows you to do. The text mode can be 
used for quite a few different types of games if you 
redefine the character set. You can build up figures 
that are larger than one character size by placing 
the different pieces of the figure in adjacent loca- 
tions. This gives you quite a bit of flexibility in us- 
ing graphics as long as you define your own 
character set. 

Each character is defined in memory as an ar- 
ray of 8 by 8 bits. This is stored as eight sequential 
bytes. Each byte has eight bits, and each bit 
represents one pixel on the screen. If a bit is on, 
the corresponding pixel on the screen will be turn- 
ed on in the character color. If the bit is off, the 
background color is used for that pixel. The value 
in the text RAM is used as a lookup into the 
graphics RAM to choose which set of eight bytes 
will represent a character. If you decide to make 
your own character set, you will have to define any 
text characters that you may need as well as your 
graphics figures. Once you instruct the VIC chip to 
get its graphics data from RAM, it will no longer 
be able to use the character generator ROM. 

Using a machine language monitor, you can 
enter the data for your character set into RAM. 
When you are finished, you should save your new 
set to the disk for later use. The first 8 bytes in your 
character set will be displayed if you place a into 
a text memory location (assuming that you had 
previously instructed the VIC chip to get its 
graphics information from the place in memory 
where your new character set was placed). Your 
character set must begin on a multiple of $0800 in 
the current bank. The character set may not be 



placed in one of the locations where the VIC chip 
can see the character generator ROM. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "standard_text_mode_and_vidbas" which expands on changing the graphics base so VIC obtains character data from RAM
