# - C64 I/O Map (Mapping The Commodore 64) - $D404 (54276) VCREG1 — Voice 1 Control Register bits: bit0 Gate (start ADSR), bit1 Sync (sync oscillator with osc3), bit2 Ring mod (1=ring mod osc1/3), bit3 Test (disable oscillator), bits4-7 select waveform bits (triangle, sawtooth, pulse, noise). Explains behavior of each bit and combination rules (waveforms ANDed if multiple bits set).

$D404        VCREG1       Voice 1 Control Register

                     0    Gate Bit:  1=Start attack/decay/sustain, 0=Start release
                     1    Sync Bit:  1=Synchronize Oscillator with Oscillator 3 frequency
                     2    Ring Modulation:  1=Ring modulate Oscillators 1 and 3
                     3    Test Bit:  1=Disable Oscillator 1
                     4    Select triangle waveform
                     5    Select sawtooth waveform
                     6    Select pulse waveform
                     7    Select random noise waveform

                          Bit 0.  Bit 0 is used to gate the sound.  Setting this bit to a 1
                          while selecting one of the four waveforms will start the
                          attack/decay/sustain part of the cycle.  Setting this bit back to 0
                          (while keeping the same waveform setting) anytime after a note has
                          started playing will begin the release cycle of the note.  Of course,
                          in order for the gate bit to have an effect, the frequency and
                          attack/decay/sustain/release (ADSR) registers must be set, as well as
                          the pulse width, if necessary, and the volume control set to a nonzero
                          value.

                          Bit 1.  This bit is used to synchronize the fundamental frequency of
                          Oscillator 1 with the fundamental frequency of Oscillator 3, allowing
                          you to create a wide range of complex harmonic structures from voice
                          1.  Synchronization occurs when this bit is set to 1.  Oscillator 3
                          must be set to some frequency other than zero, but no other voice 3
                          parameters will affect the output from voice 1.

                          Bit 2.  When Bit 2 is set to 1, the triangle waveform output of voice
                          1 is replaced with a ring modulated combination of Oscillators 1 and
                          3.  This ring modulation produces nonharmonic overtone structures that
                          are useful for creating bell or gong effects.

                          Bit 3.  Bit 3 is the test bit.  When set to 1, it disables the output
                          of the oscillator.  This can be useful in generating very complex
                          waveforms (even speech synthesis) under software control.

                          Bit 4.  When set to 1, Bit 4 selects the triangle waveform output of
                          Oscillator 1.  Bit 0 must also be set for the note to be sounded.

                          Bit 5.  This bit selects the sawtooth waveform when set to 1.  Bit 0
                          must also be set for the sound to begin.

                          Bit 6.  Bit 6 chooses the pulse waveform when set to 1.  The harmonic
                          content of sound produced using this waveform may be varied using the
                          Pulse Width Registers.  Bit 0 must be set to begin the sound.

                          Bit 7.  When Bit 7 is set to 1, the noise output waveform for
                          Oscillator 1 is set.  This creates a random sound output whose
                          waveform varies with a frequency proportionate to that of Oscillator
                          1.  It can be used to imitate the sound of explosions, drums, and
                          other unpitched noises.

                          One of the four waveforms must be chosen in order to create a sound.
                          Setting more than one of these bits will result in a logical ANDing of
                          the waveforms.  Particularly, the combination of the noise waveform
                          and another is not recommended.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "voice1_pulse_waveform_width_control" which expands on Pulse width used when bit6 is set
- "voice1_adsr_and_envelope" which expands on ADSR registers triggered by Gate bit
- "voice2_voice3_control_registers" which expands on Similar control for voices 2 and 3
