# MACHINE - Explains the roles of the A, X, and Y registers: they hold/manipulate 8-bit data, can be loaded from memory and stored back, and act as intermediaries because the 650x cannot move memory-to-memory directly. Notes later special roles (A as accumulator) but treats them as interchangeable for now.

                                                                         :11:

You can see that the processor works in the same way that most computer
languages do:  an instruction is executed, and then the computer proceeds to
the next instruction, and then the next, and so on.  We can change the
sequence of execution by means of a "jump" or "branch" to a new location, but
normally, it's one instruction after another.


Data Registers:  A, X, and Y
----------------------------

Any of three registers can be used to hold and manipulate eight bits of data.
We may load information from memory into A, X, or Y; and we may store
information into memory from any of A, X, or Y.

Both "load" and "store" are copying actions.  If I load A (LDA) from address
$2345, I make a copy of the contents of hex 2345 into A; but 2345 still
contains its previous value.  Similarly, if I store Y into $3456, I make a
copy of the contents of Y into that address; Y does not change.

The 650x has no way of moving information directly from one memory address to
another.  Thus, this information must pass via A, X, or Y; we load it from
the old address, and store it to the new address.

Later, the three registers will take on individual identities.  For example,
the A register is sometimes called the accumulator, since we perform addition
and subtraction there.  For the moment, they are interchangeable:  we may
load to any of the three, and we may store from any of them.

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "first_program_exchange_example" which expands on demonstrates using A and X to swap two memory bytes
- "instruction_execution_fetch_cycle" which expands on registers receive data as part of instruction execution
