# byRiclianll - Section 3.4: Data block layout: SYNC MARK, Data Block ID byte (normally $07), 256 data bytes (DOS uses first two bytes as forward track/sector pointer for chained sectors), Data Block checksum (EOR of all 256 data bytes), two $00 OFF bytes (padding), and the inter-sector (tail) gap. Inter-sector gap length varies by zone and drive (4-12 bytes between sectors typical; longer between last sector and sector 0). Data blocks (including sync) are rewritten whenever data is recorded.

3.4  The  Data  Block 

The  data  block  of  a  sector  stores  the  256  data  bytes  for  this  sector.  It  is  composed  of 
a  sync  mark,  a  data  block  ID  character,  the  256  bytes  of  data,  a  data  block  checksum 
byte,  two  off  bytes,  and  an  inter-sector  gap.  The  diagram  below  depicts  the  layout  of 
a  data  block. 


SYNC 

DATA 

2S6 

DATA 

SOO 

$00 

INTER- 

SYNC 

HEADER 

MARK 

BLOCK 

DATA  BYTES 

BLDCK 

BYTE 

BYTE 

SECTDR 

MARK 

BLOCK 

ID 

CHECKSUM 

GAP 

ID 

Let's  examine  the  bytes  that  make  up  the  data  block: 

Sync  mark:  This  consists  of  10  or  more  1  bits  as  previously  described.  It  warns  the 
DOS  that  either  a  data  block  or  a  header  block  is  coming. 

Data  Block  ID:  This  byte  is  normally  a  $07.  It  serves  to  indicate  to  the  DOS  that  this 
is  a  data  block  and  not  a  header  block  ($08). 

256  Data  Bytes:  This  is  the  actual  data  stored  in  the  sector.  See  Chapter  4  about  how 
Commodore  uses  the  first  two  bytes  as  a  forward  track  and  sector  pointer  instead  of 
actual  data. 

Data  Block  Checksum:  This  is  a  checksum  character  used  by  the  DOS  to  ensure  that 
the  data  block  was  read  correctly.  It  is  found  by  EORing  all  256  data  bytes  together. 

$00  Bytes:  These  two  bytes  are  also  called  OFF  bytes.  They  are  used  to  pad  a  data 
block  before  it  is  written.  They  are  not  referenced  again  by  the  DOS. 


33 


Inter-sector  Gap:  This  is  also  known  as  the  "tail  gap."  Its  purpose  is  to  provide  breathing 
room  between  the  end  of  the  data  block  and  the  start  of  the  next  sector.  The  length 
of  the  gap  varies  from  zone  to  zone  and  from  one  drive  to  another  (see  the  chart  in  Sec- 
tion 7.1).  Between  consectutive  sectors  the  gap  is  normally  4  to  12  bytes  long.  The  gap 
between  the  last  sector  on  a  track  and  sector  zero  is  often  longer  —  up  to  100  bytes 
in  length.  The  gap  is  designed  to  be  long  enough  so  that  if  you  write  a  data  block  on 
a  day  when  your  drive  is  turning  slightly  faster  than  300  rpm,  you  won't  overwrite  the 
start  of  the  next  sector.  (Your  drive  may  not  be  turning  at  exactly  300  rpm  all  the  time 
because  of  fluctuations  in  the  power  supplied  to  your  home  or  office,  mechanical  wear, 
belt  slippage,  changes  in  temperature,  etc.)  Note  that  the  DOS  never  reads  these  bytes. 

The  entire  data  block  (including  the  preceding  sync  mark)  is  rewritten  each  time  data 
is  recorded  on  a  diskette. 

This  concludes  our  overview  on  how  a  diskette  is  formatted.  Additional  details  about 
how  bytes  are  encoded  on  the  surface  of  a  diskette  are  provided  in  Section  7.1.  The  ac- 
tual recording  process  is  described  in  Section  9.7. 


34 



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "header_block_structure_and_fields" which expands on differences between header and data blocks
