# ********* - Covers cassette/Datasette-related functions of R6510 bits 3-5: Bit 3 is Cassette Data Output (writes tape data), Bit 4 is Cassette Switch Sense (reads whether a transport button is pressed; requires Bit 4 of D6510 at $00 to be set as input), and Bit 5 controls the Cassette Motor (0 allows motor to run when buttons pressed; 1 disables motor). Describes how the keyboard-scan interrupt routine normally controls the motor and an interlock at location 192 ($C0): how the interlock is used to prevent user control unless a transport button is pressed and how to POKE location 192 to gain control.

Bits 3-5 of this register have functions connected with the Datasette
recorder.  These are as follows:

Bit 3.  This is the Cassette Data Output line.  This line is connected
to the Cassette Data Write line on the cassette port, and is used to
send the data which is written to tape.

Bit 4.  This bit is the Cassette Switch Sense line.  This bit enables
a program to tell whether or not one of the buttons that moves the
recorder is pressed down.  If the switch on the recorder is down, this
bit will have a value of 1.  Remember that Bit 4 of the data direction
register at location 0 must contain a 0 for this bit to properly
reflect the status of the switch.

Bit 5.  Bit 5 is the Cassette Motor Control.  Setting this bit to zero
allows the motor to turn when you press one of the buttons on the
recorder, while setting it to one disables it from turning.

Most of the time, the setting of this bit will be controlled by the
interrupt routine that is used to read the keyboard every sixtieth of
a second.  If none of the buttons on the recorder is pressed, that
interrupt routine shuts the motor off and sets the interlock at
location 192 ($C0) to zero.  When a button is pressed, if the
interlock location is zero, Bit 5 of this register is set to zero to
turn the motor on.

When the interlock location contains a zero, the keyscan routine will
not let you control the setting of this bit of the register (and the
interlock is always set to zero when no buttons are pressed).  In
order for you to gain control of the motor, you must POKE a nonzero
value into 192 after a button on the recorder has been pressed.  You
can then shut off the motor and turn it back on as you please, by
manipulating this bit, so long as a button stays pressed.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "d6510_data_direction_register_at_0" which expands on Need to set corresponding D6510 direction bit (Bit 4) to input to read cassette switch sense correctly
- "r6510_internal_io_port_overview" which expands on Cassette-related bits described in the R6510 port summary
