# - C64 I/O Map (Mapping The Commodore 64) - $DC0C CIASDR — Serial Data Register: CIA serial port bit-serial transfer (MSB first). Control Register A ($DC0E) sets input/output mode; in output mode Timer A clocks bits out (transmission starts when a byte is written). Typically unused by the C64 OS as serial I/O is via other ports.

$DC0C        CIASDR       Serial Data Port

                          The CIA chip has an on-chip serial port, which allows you to send or
                          receive a byte of data one bit at a time, with the most significant
                          bit (Bit 7) being transferred first.  Control Register A at 56334
                          ($DC0E) allows you to choose input or output modes.  In input mode, a
                          bit of data is read from the SP line (pin 5 of the User Port) whenever
                          a signal on the CNT line (pin 4) appears to let you know that it is
                          time for a read.  After eight bits are received this way, the data is
                          placed in the Serial Port Register, and an interrupt is generated to
                          let you know that the register should be read.

                          In output mode, you write data to the Serial Port Register, and it is
                          sent out over the SP line (pin 5 of the User Port), using Timer A for
                          the baud rate generator.  Whenever a byte of data is written to this
                          register, transmission will start as long as Timer A is running and in
                          continuous mode.  Data is sent at half the Timer A rage, and an output
                          will appear on the CNT line (pin 4 of the User Port) whenever a bit is
                          sent.  After all eight bits have been sent, an interrupt is generated
                          to indicate that it is time to load the next byte to send into the
                          Serial Register.

                          The Serial Data Register is not used by the 64, which does all of its
                          serial I/O through the regular data ports.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "dc0e_ciacra_control_register_a" which expands on Control bits to set serial mode and timer clock selection
