# Contents - Advice on defining hardware register names and RAM variables early, data placement strategies (data preceding code with a jump to start of code), and use of separate files for macro libraries and system definitions to simplify editing and reuse.

of storage space for a macro that is not used. The 
source code for a complete macro library is given 
in the file MACLIB, Listing C-l in Appendix C. All 
of the macros in the file are described in detail in 
Appendix B. As they are given in the file, the 



macros will work with the Commodore Macro 
Assembler program. If you are using another 
assembler, you may have to modify them slightly 
before they can be used. 

Once the macros are in the system, the 
machine's hardware registers should be defined. 
This is the starting point when you try to learn how 
a new computer works, as it forces you to become 
familiar with the hardware. A full set of system 
definitions can be found in the file SYSDEF, Listing 
C-2 in Appendix C. The names that are assigned 
to the various hardware registers by this file are 
used throughout the book, so it would be a good idea 
to refer to the listing at some point. Most of the 
registers will be described in detail in a later chapter. 

The RAM that is to be used as variables for the 
program needs to be defined next. You will usually 
find that programming is easier if you define your 
variables before you start to write your program. 
These definitions do not have to be completed dur- 
ing the first sitting. As you progress in your pro- 
gram, you will find that you have not defined all of 
the RAM that you would like to use. Additions to 



17 



the RAM definitions tend to continue until the pro- 
gram is shipped or scrapped, whichever comes first. 

After all the hardware registers and RAM that 
you are planning to use have been defined, you are 
ready to start entering data. Where you put the data 
is a matter of available space and personal 
preference. If you are going to put data immediate- 
ly preceding the code, it would be a wise move to 
put a jump to the first instruction of your program 
before you define your first byte of data. In this way, 
you will always know what the starting address of 
your program is, no matter how the size of the data 
section may change. The data section will contain 
all the data that is not code. 

This may seem like quite a few preliminaries 
to the actual program, but all of the steps do need 
to be taken. The actual source code that you will 
be creating will be making constant references to 
all of the names and definitions that have been de- 
fined previously. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "program_organization_overview" which expands on macro and system definitions as initial parts of a program
