# byRiclianll - Deleted files (DEL) explained: file-type byte $80. DEL is an undocumented Commodore type (rare) used for protection tricks. DEL cannot be created via OPEN; must change file-type byte manually. Loading examples provided for PRG-like DEL files: LOAD "FILENAME,DEL,R",8 (relocated) and LOAD "FILENAME,DEL,R",8,1 (not relocated). Also shows how to OPEN a DEL-structured sequential file for reading: OPEN 2,8,2,"FILE NAME, DEL, R".

that  the  DOS  will  expect  to  find  the  track  and  sector  links  in  their  normal  places.  If 
they  are  not  there,  all  the  blocks  that  make  up  your  file  will  be  earmarked  as  free  in 
the  BAM  whenever  the  disk  is  vahdated! 

4.9  Deleted  File  Storage 

A  deleted  file  (DEL)  has  a  file-type  byte  of  $80  in  the  directory.  This  is  not  a  scratched 
file  ($00),  but  an  undocumented  Commodore  file  type  (DEL).  It  is  extremely  rare.  Only 
one  vendor  has  dared  use  a  DEL  file  on  a  commercial  product  to  date.  It  was  not  a  func- 
tional file  and  was  placed  on  the  diskette  to  intimidate  users  as  part  of  a  low  level  pro- 
tection scheme. 

You  cannot  create  a  DEL  file  using  an  OPEN  statement.  You  can  only  create  a  DEL 
file  by  changing  the  file-type  byte  of  an  existing  file  to  $80  as  described  in  the  next  sec- 
tion. Since  a  DEL  file  is  really  another  file  type  in  disguise,  a  DEL  file  may  have  the 
structure  of  either  a  sequential  file  or  a  program  file.  If  it  has  the  structure  of  a  pro- 
gram file,  it  may  be  loaded  using  one  of  these  commands: 

LOAD  "FILE  NAME, DEL, R", 8  (RELOCATED) 

LOAD  "FILE  NAME , DEL , R " , 8 , 1  ( NOT  RELOCATED ) 


69 


If  a  DEL  file  is  structured  like  a  sequential  file,  it  may  be  opened  in  read  mode  using 
the  following  command: 


OPEN  2,8,2, "FILE  NAME, DEL, R" 



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "user_file_usr" which expands on other uncommon file types and their directory byte codes
