# byRiclianll - Usage notes: direct-access commands often used together (e.g., U1 read a sector into a buffer, B-P or M-R examine/modify buffer, U2 write buffer back). Block-read (U1), buffer-pointer (B-P), and block-write (U2) are easiest and most used; M-R and M-W are more advanced. B-A/B-F used for random-access file maintenance (rare). M-E and B-E (execute) are advanced and used rarely.



Peek  bytes  out  of  1541  RAM  or  ROM. 

Poke  bytes  into  1541  RAM. 

Set  bit  in  BAM  to  indicate  a  sector  is  in  use. 

Set  bit  in  BAM  to  indicate  a  sector  is  not  in  use. 

Execute  a  6502  routine  stored  in  1541  RAM 

or  ROM. 

Load  and  execute  a  6502  routine  in  1541  RAM. 


More  often  than  not,  direct-access  commands  complement  one  another  in  actual  use. 
For  example,  a  sector  can  be  read  from  disk  using  a  Ul  command,  examined  using  a 
B-P  or  M-R  command,  altered  using  a  B-P  or  M-R  command,  and  rewritten  to  disk  us- 
ing a  U2  command. 

The  block-read  (Ul),  buffer-pointer,  and  block-write  (U2)  comands  are  the  easiest  to  com- 
prehend and,  as  a  result,  the  most  widely  used.  The  memory-read  and  memory-write 
commands  represent  a  more  sophisticated  level  of  direct-access  programming  and  are 
sometimes  used  in  lieu  of  the  buffer-pointer  command.  The  block-allocate  and  block-free 
commands  are  used  primarily  for  the  maintenance  of  random  access  files.  Random  ac- 
cess files  were  the  forerunner  of  relative  files  and  are  rarely  used  today.  The  memory- 
execute  command  is  used  at  the  guru  level  of  disk  programming  and  requires  a  rudimen- 
tary knowledge  of  both  machine  language  and  the  innards  of  the  1541  to  implement. 
The  block-execute  command,  while  documented  by  Commodore,  is  almost  never  used. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "block_write_u2_syntax" which expands on block-write (U2) counterpart to block-read
- "memory_read_m-r_syntax" which expands on use of memory commands instead of B-P for sophisticated access
