# MACHINE - Explains the monitor's disassembler (.D): inverse-assembly to translate bytes back to mnemonics, how to disassemble starting at an address (example .D 033C), reading the listing, editing errors directly by changing bytes on the left-hand side, and re-assembling a corrected line.

Checking:  The Disassembler
---------------------------

When we changed our source code into object code, we called this process of
translation assembly, and we called a program that did the job an assembler.

Now we're written a program and it's safely stored in memory.  We have
inspected memory and have seen the bytes there; but they are hard to read.
It would be convenient if we could perform an inverse assembly, that is, take
the contents of memory and translate it into source code.  The monitor has
this capability, called a disassembler.

If we ask the computer to disassemble the code starting at $033C, it will
examine the code there and establish that the contents ($A9) correspond to an
LDA immediate command.  It will then print for our information LDA #$48,
which is much more readable than the original two bytes, A9 48.

Give the command .D 033C and press RETURN.  D stands for disassemble, of
course, and the address must follow.

The computer will now show a full screen of code.  On the left is the address
followed by the bytes making up the instruction.  On the right is the
reconstructed source code.  The screen shows much more memory than our
program needs.  Again, we ignore all lines beyond address $0341, which is the
last instruction of our program.  Anything following is "junk" left in memory
that the program does not use.

An interesting feature of most disassembly listings is that the cursor is
left flashing on the last line of the disassembly rather than on the line
below.  When you have a large program, this allows you to type the letter D
followed by RETURN and the next part of your program will immediately be
displayed.  On the other hand, if you don't want to disassemble more code,
press the cursor down key and move to a "clean" line before typing your next
instruction.

A disassembly is a good way to check for errors.  If you find an error in the
listing, you may correct that line by re-assembling it, using the .A command
once again.  Minor errors may be corrected directly on the left-hand side of
the disassembly listing.  In other words, suppose that you had incorrectly
coded LDA #$58 during the assembly phase; when you perform the disassembly,
this line will show as

                                                                         :30:

  .,033C A9 58     LDA #$58

You recognize that the 58 should be 48; you may move the cursor up--use the
cursor home if you wish--and type over the value on the left-hand side.  In
this case, you place the cursor over the 5, type 4 to change the display to
48, and press RETURN.  You will see from the display that the problem has
been fixed.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "display_memory_and_object_bytes" which expands on disassembling the bytes you inspected
- "running_program_with_monitor" which expands on run the program after verifying with the disassembler
