# MACHINE - Notes about the disk programs: they are public domain and available from user groups. Guidance for using SUPERMON builders: they are monitor generators that build a monitor in RAM; after building you should remove the builder program (RUN/STOP .X, NEW, then SYS to return to the monitor). The monitor is built near top-of-memory (check TOM). After placement, other programs may be loaded while Supermon stays until power-off.

                                                                        :310:

These programs are public domain, and may be obtained from user groups.  They
are available here for user convenience.

The following notes may be useful in using or studying the programs.


  SUPERMON1        - for original ROM PET computers
  SUPERMON2        - for upgrade ROM PET/CBM computers
  SUPERMON4        - for 4.0 PET/CBM computers
  SUPERMON.V       - for VIC-20 computers
  SUPERMON64       - for Commodore 64 computers
  SUPERMON INST    - instructions, BASIC

Supermon 2 and 4 are "extensions" to the built-in MLM of the respective
machines.  The other Supermon versions are complete monitors.

Remember that the programs on disk are "monitor generators," that is, they
build the monitor for you.  After the monitor has been build, you should
remove the builder program so that you don't end up with two copies.  In
other words, after RUN type .X to return to BASIC, NEW to scrap the builder,
and then SYS4 or SYS8 to return to the monitor whenever desired.

The monitor is always built near the top of memory.  Its entry address can be
determined by checking the TOM (top-of-memory) pointer.  Monitors are
complex, but feel free to ask the monitor to disassemble itself for your
information.

After Supermon is placed, you may load BASIC programs and use the computer
normally.  Supermon will remain until you shut off the power.



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "disk_user_guide_program_list" which expands on list of disk programs
- "supermon64_overview" which expands on see SUPERMON64 in the program list
