# Contents - How to load, relocate and display a Koala Pad picture: advice to relocate graphics and color data to convenient addresses (preferably page boundaries), set the VIC multicolor bit before displaying, set the border color (not stored in Koala file), and how to run the supplied DISPLAY PIC program (loads machine code MVIT and displays until shift is pressed). Example RUN sequence: LOAD "DISPLAY PIC",8 then RUN; file names must be converted with KO-COM.

that is convenient to your program. You should then 
save your newly created file back to the disk. You 
will probably want to move the data since the Koala 
software is more interested in reducing the size of 
the disk file than in placing the data in a useful loca- 
tion. It would be a good idea to move the color 



54 



memory areas to the beginning of a page boundary. 
This will make it easier and faster to manipulate 
the data later. The background color may be stored 
wherever is convenient. 

The data was created using the multicolored bit- 
mapped mode, so be sure to set the multicolor mode 
bit in the VIC chip before displaying the picture. 
Also, note that the border color is not stored in the 
file. You must set the border color to the appropriate 
value before displaying the picture. 

DISPLAY PIC, Listing C-14 in Appendix C, will 
display a Koala Pad picture on the screen. It will 
load the machine language routine MVIT in Listing 
C-15. This program follows the steps above to 
display the picture. It will also set the border color 
to black. It will display the picture until the shift 
key is pressed on the keyboard. This program will 
not display a picture if you change the location of 
the data in the file. To run this program enter: 

LOAD"DISPLAY PIC",8< RETURN > 
RUN 

Enter the name of the picture to be displayed when 
prompted. The file name must have been previously 
changed using the KO-COM utility. A picture in the 
Koala Pad format is in Listing C-16 in Appendix C 
under the name PIC A CASTLE. This picture can 
be viewed using the DISPLAY PIC program. This 
drawing could make a nice background for a game, 
if you were so inclined. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "koala_filename_utils_and_memory_map" which expands on where Koala stores graphics and color data in memory
- "sprite_maker_utility" which expands on other utilities for generating graphics (sprites)
