# Contents - DONKEY-KONG overview and translation notes: Mario climbs structures while avoiding barrels, hammers, fireballs; arcade screens are rotated 90 degrees (taller than wide). On the C64, backgrounds (structures, Donkey Kong, girl, dropped items) can be character graphics; sprites used for Mario, barrels and fireballs. Technique: reduce sprite count by letting barrels roll off-screen when they descend between levels (player focus hides disappearance), allowing fewer sprites to represent many barrels; sprite repositioning (multiplexing) across scanlines increases flexibility.

DONKEY-KONG 

In DONKEY-KONG, the player controls Mario, 
who is trying to rescue a girl from the clutches of 
DONKEY-KONG, a large ape. To do this, Mario 
must climb the various structures that DON j E'S- 
KONG sits on. To make Mario's life more difficult, 
DONKEY-KONG keeps throwing barrels and ham- 
mers down at Mario. On some screens, there are 
fireballs that he must dodge. As Mario climbs 
toward DONKEY-KONG, he can pick up articles of 
the girl's clothing that she has dropped on her way 
up. Mario can also pick up a hammer and proceed 
to beat up the barrels and fireballs for a short 
amount of time. Mario can jump over the barrels 
and fireballs, for which he gains points. If Mario can 
get up to the level where DONKEY-KONG is stan- 
ding, he either rescues the girl, or depending on the 
level, DONKEY-KONG carries the girl higher up on 
the structure. Mario is then presented with the next 
level of play. The arcade version of the game has 
four different types of structures that must be 
climbed. 

Translating DONKEY-KONG to the Com- 
modore 64 is very similar to translating PAC-MAN. 
The background structures, DONKEY-KONG, and 
the girl can all be made up of character graphics. 
The articles of clothing that the girl has dropped 
can also be made up of character graphics. This 
leaves all of the sprites free for Mario, the barrels 
and the fireballs. 

If you watch an arcade version of DONKEY- 



KONG very carefully, you may see how its designers 
avoided the problem of needing a large number of 
sprites. When a barrel rolls past Mario and heads 
for the next lower level, it will normally roll off the 
edge of the screen rather than descending to the 
next level. Because the player's eyes are normally 
focused on Mario and the portions of the screen 
above him, he will not normally notice the disap- 
pearing barrels. Because the machine does this, it 
never needs more than five sprites to display all of 
the barrels. This same technique will work for a 
translation of DONKEY-KONG for the Commodore 
64. If five sprites were reserved for fireballs and bar- 
rels and one for Mario, there would still be two left 
over for hammers. In fact, you would have even 
more flexibility in the use of sprites. For the most 
part there are only 3 or 4 sprites displayed on any 
given line. Using the technique of repositioning 
sprites, you could reposition the sprites on different 
lines. 

Like PAC-MAN, in the arcade, DONKEY 
KONG's screen is rotated 90 degrees from a nor- 
mal television. For this reason, any translation of 
DONKEY-KONG to the Commodore 64 will be 
wider and shorter than the original. 




---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sprite_multiplexing_benefits" which expands on reusing sprites on different lines to show more moving objects
