# byRiclianll - Chapter 2 introduction & Section 2.1: Purpose of a DOS and Commodore's approach — the 1541 is an 'intelligent peripheral' with its own 6502 CPU, RAM, 6522 chips, and ROM DOS. Lists advantages (no host RAM used, concurrent operations, shareable) and disadvantages (hard to customize, ROM replacement needed for updates).

CHAPTER  2 


USING  THE  154rS  DOS 


2.1  The  Purpose  of  a  DOS 

A  disk  operating  system  (DOS)  is  a  machine  language  program  that  controls  a  disk  drive. 
It  does  several  different  tasks: 

1.  Handling  communications  between  a  disk  drive  and  a  computer. 

2.  Carrying  out  housekeeping  chores  such  as  formatting  a  diskette. 

3.  Managing  the  storage  of  information  on  a  diskette. 

4.  Reading  and  writing  information  onto  a  diskette's  surface. 

In  many  computer  systems,  a  DOS  is  loaded  into  the  main  computer's  memory  from 
diskette  when  the  computer  is  first  switched  on.  In  this  type  of  system  many  of  the 
tasks  are  carried  out  using  the  computer's  microprocessor  and  RAM.  Commodore  uses 
a  different  approach.  All  of  Commodore's  disk  drives  are  intelligent  peripherals.  They 
do  not  have  to  use  the  computer's  resources;  they  have  their  own.  For  example,  the 
1541  disk  drive  contains  its  own  6502  microprocessor,  2K  of  RAM,  two  6522  I/O  chips, 
and  a  DOS  program  permanently  stored  in  15.8K  of  ROM. 

The  advantages  of  having  an  intelligent  disk  drive  are: 

1.  The  DOS  does  not  use  any  of  the  computer's  memory. 

2.  Some  disk  operations  can  be  carried  out  independently  from  the  CPU. 

3.  Disk  operations  do  not  slow  down  processing. 

4.  One  disk  drive  can  be  shared  among  several  computers. 

The  disadvantages  of  having  an  intelligent  disk  drive  are: 

1.  It  is  very  difficult  to  customize  DOS  routines. 

2.  You  must  replace  the  ROMs  to  convert  to  a  new  version  of  DOS . 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "communicating_with_1541_methods" which expands on how the computer communicates with the 1541
- "overview_of_1541_dos_and_hardware" which expands on ROM routines and 6502 in the 1541 (see later chapters)
