# Multidirectional Scrolling Techniques by Cadaver - Describes the 'scroll registers centered when idle' approach and how splitting shifting across frames imposes restrictions. Shows scroll-register value sequences for right-to-left scrolling (4,2,0,6,4 ...) and for left-to-right scrolling after resetting to 3 (3,5,7,1,3 ...). Explains this method enables 8-directional but not free-directional scrolling.

2.1 Splitting leads to restrictions: 8-directional scrolling

This "splitting" is a good thing but it imposes some restrictions on at which
speed you can scroll, and to what directions. Without splitting, you know that
it's time to shift the screen data when the hardware scroll register(s) wrap.
But with splitting?

Have you taken a look at games such as Turrican or Navy Seals? You'll notice
that they only scroll one char-length at a time, never less. They're likely
using the "scroll registers centered when idle"-ideology. This means: when
not scrolling, the hardware scroll register is either set to 4 or 3, centered
on a char. Now, if scrolling happens from right to left at speed of 2 pixels/
frame, the scrolling register will get the following values on successive
frames:

4 (initial state, first half of screen-memory shifting)
2 (second half of screen shifting, possibly drawing new data)
0 (shifted screen has to appear next frame, so shift color-memory now and swap
   the doublebuffer screens)
6 (scrolling one char finished, this frame we don't have to do anything)
4 (if scrolling for more than one char, the loop starts again. Otherwise, stop
   here)

What if we're scrolling from left to right? If we'd be starting from 4 again
we'd hit the "wrap point" one frame earlier and we'd not be ready yet.
Therefore, we must first reset the scroll register to 3 (this is barely
noticeable, so it isn't a bad thing.) The scroll register values on successive
frames will now be:

3 (initial state, first half of screen shifting)
5 (second half of screen shifting, possibly drawing new data)
7 (color-screen shifting, swap screens)
1 (don't have to do anything)
3 (loop starts again if necessary)

This method gives the possibility to 8-directional scrolling, but not
freedirectional.



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "scrolling_overview_doublebuffering" which expands on why splitting frames requires doublebuffering and affects scroll timing
- "freedirectional_scrolling_two_frame_method" which expands on contrast with freedirectional approach
