# An Introduction to Programming C-64 Demos - Recommended exercise: build a small demo part containing a logo at top, 8 sprites moving in sine patterns (tables for X/Y, offsets per sprite), a bottom scroller, raster bars in top/bottom border, and a playing tune (ripped tunes often at $1000). Advice to pack/crunch the demo for distribution and testing.

An Exercise
As I've stated before, you won't learn demo programming by just reading about it. You need to write demos yourself. Before you start trying to use IRQ loaders and writing really advanced effects, try to write a part that consists of the following things:


A logo at the top of the screen. You can draw it yourself, using some graphics program. Either use multi-colour mode or single-colour hires.

8 sprites moving around the screen in some sine pattern. This might be a bit tricky the first time you try to do it, but all you really have to do is to set up two tables, one for the X coordinates and one for the Y coordinates, and assign each sprite an offset into the tables. Then change these offsets each frame, and just read the values from the tables and poke them into $d000, $d001 etc. The easiest thing is of course to use tables that are $100 bytes long.

A scroll text at the bottom of the screen.

Raster bars in the top and bottom border. You don't have to open the border to do this, you just have to change $d020.

A tune playing. You don't have to go through the hassle of learning to use a music editor, just rip a tune from some other demo. As stated earlier, they're usually located at $1000, and are often shorter than $1000 bytes, so often all you have to do is to start the demo, reset, go into the monitor and save the area from $1000 to $1fff.
You should of course familiarize yourself with some of the tools, so don't forget to pack and crunch this demo, so that you can just load it and type RUN to start it. See the Tools section below.

If you manage to put together a demo like this, you've come a long way. And if you do, please send it to me! It'd be really cool if people could actually learn to code demos from this document!


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sine_editors_and_sample_basic" which expands on creating sine tables for sprite motion
- "irq_loaders" which expands on using IRQ loaders for multi-part demos
