# COMMODORE 64 - Descriptions of important signals on the C64 expansion port: system ground pins (1, 22, A, Z); Pin 6 DOT CLOCK (8.18 MHz) as the master video dot clock and system timing source; Pin 12 BA (BUS AVAILABLE) from the VIC-II, which goes low 3 cycles before the VIC-II takes over the system buses and stays low while display fetches occur; Pin 13 DMA behavior — when low the 6510 address/data/RW lines enter high-impedance to allow an external processor to take over buses, timing cautions (must be pulled low only when φ2 clock is low), VIC-II DMA implications, and that the DMA line is pulled up on the C64.


                                                   INPUT/OUTPUT GUIDE   367
~


    Following is a description of some important fines on the expansion
  port:

    Pins 1,22,A,Z are connected to the system ground.
    Pin 6 is the DOT CLOCK. This is the 8.18-MHz video dot clock. All
  system timing is derived from this clock.
    Pin 12 is the BA (BUS AVAILABLE) signal from the VIC-II chip. This line
  will go low 3 cycles before the VIC-II takes over the system busses, and
  remains low until the VIC-II is finished fetching display information.
    Pin 13 is the DMA (DIRECT MEMORY ACCESS) line. When this line is pulled
  low, the address bus, the data bus, and the Read/Write line of the 6510
  processor chip enter high-impedance state mode. This allows an external
  processor to take control of the system busses. This line should only be
  pulled low when the (02 clock is low. Also, since the VIC-II chip will
  continue to perform display DMA, the external device must conform to the
  VIC-II timing. (See VIC-II timing diagram.) This line is pulled up on the
  Commodore 64.




---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "z80_cartridge_and_cpm_overview" which expands on Z-80 cartridge plugs into expansion port and relies on expansion bus signals
- "z80_enable_basic_program" which expands on Program uses bus-control signals (enabling Z-80 and disabling 6510 IRQs) described here
