# COMMODORE 64 - Expressions defined (constants, variables, arrays, and combinations using operators). Classification into arithmetic and string expressions. Definition of operands and operators; BASIC recognizes arithmetic, relational and logical operators.

  EXPRESSIONS AND OPERATORS

    Expressions are formed using constants, variables and/or arrays. An
  expression can be a single constant, simple variable, or an array vari-

                                                BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES   9
~


  able of any type. It can also be a combination of constants and variables
  with arithmetic, relational or logical operators designed to produce a
  ingle value. How operators work is explained below. Expressions can be
  separated into two classes:

    1) ARITHMETIC
    2) STRING

    Expressions are normally thought of as having two or more data items
  called operands. Each operand is separated by a single operator to
  produce the desired result. This is usually done by assigning the value
  of the expression to a variable name. All of the examples of constants
  and variables that you've seen so for, were also examples of expressions.
    An operator is a special symbol the BASIC Interpreter in your Commodore
  64 recognizes as representing an operation to be performed on the
  variables or constant data. One or more operators, combined with one or
  more variables and/or constants form an expression. Arithmetic,
  relational and logical operators are recognized by Commodore 64 BASIC.

  ARITHMETIC EXPRESSIONS

    Arithmetic expressions, when solved, will give an integer or floating-
  point value. The arithmetic operators (+, -, *, /, ^) are used to perform
  addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and exponentiation opera-
  tions respectively.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "arithmetic_operations" which expands on arithmetic operators (+,-,*,/,^)
- "string_operations_and_concatenation" which expands on string concatenation using +
