# 6502 Instruction Set - External links and references: Virtual 6502 tools, 6502.org, visual6502.org transistor-level simulation, Western Design Center Inc. site (WDC), and credits 'mass:werk'. Also file path of original HTML source. Mentions presented by mass:werk and provides further reading suggestions for in-depth study.

          data lines at the same time as the contents of the X-register, while there's
          also the operand read for the immediate operation, with the result
          transferred to the accumulator.
          In the case of LXA, the immediate operand and the contents of the accumulator
          are competing for the imput lines, while the result will be transferred to
          both the accumulator and the X register.
          The outcome of these competing, noisy conditions depends on the production
          series of the chip, and maybe even on environmental conditions. This effects
          in an OR-ing of the accumulator with the "magic constant" combined with an
          AND-ing of the competing inputs. The final transfer to the target register(s)
          then seems to work as may be expected.
          (This AND-ing of competing values susggests that the 6502 is working internally
          in active negative logic, where all data lines are first set to high and then
          cleared for any zero bits. This also suggests that the "magic constant" stands
          merely for a partial transfer of the contents of the accumulator.)
                                                                   6502 Instruction Set
          Much of this also applies to "TAS" (XAS, SHS), $9B, but here the extra cycles
          for indexed addressing seem to contribute to the conflict being resolved
          without this "magic constant". However, TAS is still unstable.
          Simlarly the peculiar group involving the high-byte of the provided address + 1
          (as in "H+1") — SHA (AHX, AXA), SHX (A11, SXA, XAS), SHY (A11, SYA, SAY) —
          involves a conflict of an attempt to store the accumulator and another register
          being put on the data lines at the same time, and the operations required to
          determine the target address for for indexed addressing. Again, the competing
          values are AND-ed and the instructions are unstable.
          We may also observe that SHY is really the unimplemented instruction "STY abs,X"
          and SHX is "STX abs,Y" with SHA being the combination of "LDA abs,X" and SHX.
          We may conclude that these "illegal opcodes" or "undocumented instructions" are
          really a text-book example of undefined behavior for undefined input patterns.
          Generally speaking, for any instructions xxxxxx11 (c=3) both instructions at
          xxxxxx01 (c=1) and xxxxxx10 (c=2) are started in a thread, with competing ouput
          values on the internal data lines AND-ed. For some combinations, this results
          in a fragile race condition, while others are showing mostly stable behavior.
          The addressing mode is generally determined by that of the instruction at c=1.
          (It may be interesting that is doesn't matter, if any of the two threads jams,
          as long as the timing for the other thread resolves. So there is no "JAM"
          instruction at c=3.)
          Pinout
          • 6502 (NMOS)
                                                                        6502 Instruction Set
                VCC       supply voltage (+5 V DC ± 5%, +7 V max.)
                VSS       logical ground
                Φ0…2      clock
                A0 … A15  address bus
                D0 … D7   data bus
                R/W       read/write (low on write)
                RDY       ready
                S.O.      set overflow (future I/O interface)
                SYNC      sync (goes high on opcode fetch phase)
                IRQ       interrupt request (active low)
                NMI       non maskable interrupt (active low)
                RES       reset (active low)
                N.C.      no connection
           After: MCS6500 Microcomputer Family Hardware Manual. MOS Technology, Inc., 1976.
                                                6502 Instruction Set
          • WDC 65C02S (40 Pin PDIP)
                VDD       positive supply voltage
                VSS       logical ground
                Φ1…2      clock
                A0 … A15  address bus

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "site_notes_disclaimer_and_tools" which expands on local site notes and virtual tools references
- "pinouts_and_physical_signals" which expands on datasheets referenced for pinouts
