# MACHINE - Concise flag summary table (Z, C, N, V) with their meanings, activity level, and corresponding branch instructions. Complete overview of the processor Status Register (SR): bit positions (7..0 = N V - B D I Z C), meanings of each bit including unused bit 5, B (break), D (decimal mode) with SED/CLD cautions, I (interrupt disable) with SEI/CLI, and examples for interpreting SR hex values. Warning about manually editing SR in monitor.

Flag Summary
------------

A brief table may help review the four testable flags.


Flag    Brief                          Activity    Branch taken if:
Name    Meaning                        Level       Set    Not Set
------------------------------------------------------------------
 Z      Zero, equal                    Busy        BEQ    BNE
 C      Carry, greater/equal           Quiet       BCS    BCC
 N      Negative, high-bit             Busy        BMI    BPL
 V      Signed arithmetic overflow     Quiet       BVS    BVC


The Status Register
-------------------

The preceding flags--and three others--may be viewed within the status
register (SR).  You may recall that the machine language monitor gives an SR
display.  If you know how to read it, you can see the condition of all flags.

Each flag is a bit within the status register.  Again, it's useful to be able
to easily translate the hexadecimal display, so as to view the individual
flags.  Here's a chart of the flags within the status register:

  7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
  N V - B D I Z C

Taking the bits one at a time, starting at the high bit:

  N--the N flag, as above.

  V--the V flag, as above.

  Bit 5--unused.  You'll often find that this bit is "on."

  B--"Break" indicator.  When an interrupt occurs, this signals whether or
  not the interrupt was caused by a BRK instruction.

  D--Decimal mode indicator.  This changes the manner in which the add and
  subtract instructions operate.  In Commodore machines, this flag will
  always be off.  Don't turn it on unless you know exactly what you're doing.
  This flag may be turned on with the SED (set decimal) instruction, and
  turned off with the CLD (clear decimal) instruction.

  I--Interrupt disable.  More exactly, this bit disables the IRQ (interrupt
  request) pin activity.  More on this control bit much later.  This flag may
  be turned on with the SEI (set interrupt disable) instruction, and turned
  off with the CLI (clear interrupt disable) instruction.

  Z--the Z flag, as above.

  C--the C flag, as above.

                                                                         :46:

  Flags B, D, and I are not testable flags in that there are no branch
  instructions that test them directly.  D, the decimal mode flag, and I, the
  interrupt lockout flag, may be considered "control" flags.  Instead of
  reporting conditions found as the program runs, they control how the
  program operates.

When we see a value displayed in the SR, or status register, we may examine
it to determine the condition of the flags, especially the testable flags Z,
C, N, and V.  For example, if wee see an SR value of $B1, we translate to
binary %10110001 an know that the N flag is on, the V flag is off, the Z flag
is off, and the C flag is on.

You may change these flags by typing over the displayed value in the machine
language monitor.  Be careful you don't accidentally set the D or I flags.



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "flags_introduction_and_z_flag" which expands on Z flag details referenced in SR
- "c_flag_description" which expands on C flag referenced in SR
- "v_flag_and_overflow" which expands on V flag and CLV instruction
