# An Introduction to Programming C-64 Demos - Document footnotes explaining side remarks (danger of pointers, assembler neutrality, Turbo Assembler RESTORE caveat, PAL/NTSC refresh rates, 14-bit VIC addressing detail, bitmap layout note, cycle counting note) and final footer/timestamps.

Footnotes
... dangerous1
A couple of guys, who weren't all that good at C, were writing a toy operating system. They got all sorts of bugs and weird crashes, and didn't know what to do. After a while they came up with a solution: to re-write the whole kernel without using any pointers at all. Don't ask me how they did it, but they did get it to work. Morale of the story: code some C-64 demos, and you'll never run into problems like that. :-)
... it2
This code should be pretty assembler neutral, ie. you can use whichever assembler you want. You can't type this stuff into a monitor, though, as it uses labels. If you're going to use a monitor, you have to change the JMP instructions into jumps to absolute addresses, ie. change JMP loop into JMP $1000. You also need to remove the line * = $1000, which just means that the code should begin at the address $1000.
... program3
See the Tools section on how to do that.
... long4
Actually, if you do your math, you'll realize that it's only $03e8 bytes long. Then follows $10 bytes that you can use for whatever you want, and 8 bytes that are the sprite pointers.
... RESTORE5
This doesn't work in all version of Turbo Assembler. If your version doesn't support this, you can add some code to do it for you.
... second6
On PAL systems, that is, on NTSC systems the screen is redrawn 60 times per second.
... bit7
Why 14 bits? Because the VIC can only address 16 kB of memory, which is what you get with a 14 bit address space.
... bitmaps8
Not as weird as mode X on VGA cards, though.
... cycles9
Except the last one, which will only take 11 cycles, as the branch isn't performed.
next_inactive up previous
2004-07-24

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "d012_raster_register" which expands on note on PAL vs NTSC refresh rates and raster line counts
- "bitmap_screen_layout" which expands on note clarifying bitmap layout vs other platforms
