# ********* - Chapter 1 introduction to the 1541 disk drive: high-level overview, intended audience (beginners to professionals), how the manual is organized and which chapters to read for basic vs advanced usage.




1. GENERAL DESCRIPTION

1.1 INTRODUCTION

Welcome to the fastest, easiest, and most efficient filing system
available for your Commodore 64 or VIC 20 computer, your 1541 DISK
DRIVE.  This manual has been designed to show you how to get the most
from your drive, whether you're a beginner or an advanced professional.


If you are a beginner, the first few chapters will help you through
the basics of disk drive installation and operation.  As your skill
and programming knowledge improves, you will find more uses for your
disk drive and the more advanced chapters of this manual will become
much more valuable.

If you're a professional, this reference guide will show you how to
put the 1541 through its paces to perform just about all the disk
drive jobs you can think of.

No matter what level of expertise you have, your 1541 disk drive will
dramatically improve the overall capabilities of your computer system.

Before you get to the details of 1541 operation, you should be aware
of a few important points.  This manual is a REFERENCE GUIDE, which
means that unless the information you seek directly pertains to the
disk or disk drive you will have to use your Commodore 64 or VIC 20
User's Guides and Programmer's Reference Guides to find programming
information.  In addition, even though we give you step-by-step
instructions for each operation, you should become familiar with BASIC
and the instructions (called commands) that help you operate your
disks and drives.  However, if you just want to use your disk drive
unit to load and save prepackaged software, we've included an easy and
brief section on doing just that.

Now ... let's get on with the general information.

The commands for the disk drive come in several levels of
sophistication.  Starting in chapter three, you can learn how the
command that allow you to SAVE and LOAD programs with the disk work.
Chapter four teaches you how commands are sent to the disk, and
introduces the disk maintenance commands.

Chapter five tells you how to work with SEQuential data files.  These
are very similar to their counterparts on tape (but much faster).
Chapter six introduces the commands that allow you to work with random
files, to access any piece of data on the disk, and how you organize
the diskette into tracks and blocks.  Chapter seven describes the
special relative files.  RELative files are the best method of storing
data bases, especially when they are used along with sequential files.

Chapter eight describes methods for programming the disk controller
circuits at the machine language level.  And the final chapter shows
you how to change the disk device number, by cutting a line inside the
drive unit or through software.

Remember, you don't really need to learn everything in this book all
at once.  The first four chapters are enough to get you going, and the
next couple are enough for most operations.  Getting to know your disk
drive will reward you in many ways -- speed of operation, reliability,
and much more flexibility in your data processing capabilities.




---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "specifications_and_hardware_summary" which expands on hardware/capacity summary for the 1541
- "using_programs_loading_prepackaged_software" which expands on practical starting point for loading prepackaged software (Chapter 3)
