# MACHINE - Glossary definitions covering registers, screen, stack, and numeric concepts: Register, Screen editing, Screen memory, Selected (chip/device selection), Self-modifying, Signed number, Source code, Stack, Status register / processor status word, Store, Subroutine, Symbolic address (label), Symbolic assembler, Testable flag, Two's complement, Unsigned number, Write, and Zero page.

                                                                        :321:

Register: (1) Location within a processor where information can be held
              temporarily.
Screen editing: (1) The ability to change the screen of a computer and cause
                    a corresponding change in memory.
Screen memory: (2) The part of a computer holding the information displayed
                   on the screen.  Changing screen memory will change the
                   screen; reading screen memory will reveal what is on the
                   screen.
Selected: (1) A chip or device that has been signaled to participate in a
              data transfer.  If the chip or device has not been selected, it
              will ignore data operations.
Self-modifying: (7) A type of program that changes itself as it runs.  Rare,
                    and not always considered good programming practice.
Signed number: (3) A number that holds a value that may be either positive or
                   negative.
Source code: (1) Instructions written in assembly language; usually, the
                 first code written by the programmer before performing an
                 assembly.
Stack: (7) A temporary, or "scratch pad," set of memory locations.
Status register, processor status word: (3) Within the processor, a register
                                            that holds status flags.
Store: (1) To transfer information from the processor to memory.  The store
           operation is a copying activity:  the information still remains in
           the processor.
Subroutine: (2) A set of instructions that can be called up by another
                program.
Symbolic address, label: (7) A name identifying a memory location.
Symbolic assembler: (2) An assembler in which symbolic addresses may be used.
                        This is more powerful than a non-symbolic assembler.
Testable flag: (3) A flag that can be tested by means of a conditional
                   branch instruction.
Two's complement: (3) A method of representing negative numbers.  With single
                      byte numbers, -1 would be represented by $FF.
Unsigned number: (3) A number that cannot have a negative value.
Write: (1) To send information to a device.
Zero page: (5) The lowest 256 locations in memory.  Locations whose addresses
               begin with hexadecimal $00.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "glossary_machine_monitor_memory_rom" which expands on related memory, machine, and monitor terms
- "glossary_f_to_m_terms" which expands on earlier entries including interrupts and machine language
- "glossary_b_to_e_terms" which expands on earlier B–E terms such as Effective address and Event flag
