# MACHINE - Glossary definitions focused on machine/monitor and memory concepts: Machine language monitor, Memory, Memory mapped, Memory page, Microcomputer, Microprocessor, Monitor (program/screen), Non-maskable interrupt (NMI), Non-symbolic assembler, Object code, Octothorpe (#), Operand, Operating system, Operation code (op code), Overflow, Pointer, Processor status word (status register), Pull, Push, Random access memory (RAM), Read, and Read only memory (ROM).

                                                                        :320:

Machine language monitor: (1) A program that allows communication with the
                              computer in a manner convenient for machine
                              language programming.
Memory: (1) The storage used by a computer; every location is identified by
            an address.
Memory mapped: (1) Circuits that can be reached by the use of a memory
                   address, even though they are not used for storage or
                   memory purposes.
Memory page: (5) A set of 256 locations in memory, all of whose addresses
                 have the same "high byte."
Microcomputer: (1) A computer system containing a microprocessor, memory, and
                   input/output circuits.  A computer built using microchips.
Microprocessor: (1) The central logic of a microcomputer, containing logic
                    and arithmetic.  A processor built on a microchip.
Monitor: (1) A program that allows the user to communicate with the computer.
             Alternatively, a video screen device.
Non-maskable interrupt, NMI: (7) A type of interrupt that cannot be disabled.
Non-symbolic assembler: (2) An assembler in which actual addresses must be
                            used.
Object code: (1) The machine language program that will run in the computer.
Octothorpe: (2) Sometimes called a numbers sign, a pounds sign, a hash mark.
                The "#" symbol.
Operand: (1) The part of an instruction following the op code that usually
             signals where in memory the operation is to take place.
Operating system: (1) A set of programs with the computer that takes care of
                      general work such as input/output, timing, and so on.
Operation code, op code: (1) The part of an instruction that says what to do.
Overflow: (3) Condition caused by an arithmetic operation generating a result
              that is too big to fit in the space provided.
Pointer: (6) An address held in memory, usually in two bytes.
Processor status word, status register: (3) A processor register that holds
                                            status flags.
Pull: (7) To take something from the stack.
Push: (7) To put something on the stack.
Random access memory, RAM: (1) The part of a computer's memory where
                               information can be stored and recalled.
Read: (1) To obtain information from a device.
Read only memory, ROM: (1) The part of a computer's memory where fixed
                           information has been stored.  New information
                           cannot be stored in a ROM; it is preprogrammed.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "glossary_f_to_m_terms" which expands on previous F–M glossary items including Machine language
- "glossary_registers_screen_stack_and_numbers" which expands on subsequent entries about registers, screen memory, stack, and numeric representations
- "glossary_header_and_a_terms" which expands on start of glossary and A-terms
