# MACHINE - Glossary definitions covering F–M: File, Flag, Floating accumulator, Garbage collection, Increment, Index, Index register, Indirect address, Instruction, Interrupt, Interrupt enable register, Interrupt flag, Interrupt flag register, Interrupt source, Kernal, Label (symbolic address), Latch, Load, Logical file number, Logical operator, Logical shift or rotate, Machine code, and Machine language.

                                                                        :319:

File: (8) A collection of data stored on some external device.
Flag: (3) An on/off indicator that signals some condition.
Floating accumulator: (7) A group of memory locations used by BASIC to
                          perform calculations on a number.
Garbage collection: (6) A BASIC process in which active strings are gathered
                        together and inactive strings are discarded.  On some
                        computers this can be quite time consuming.
Increment: (2) To make larger by a value of one.
Index: (2) To change an address by adding the contents of an index register.
Index register: (2) The X or Y register, which may be used for changing
                    effective addresses.
Indirect address: (5) An addressing scheme whereby the instruction contains
                      the location of the actual address to be used; an
                      address of an address.
Instruction: (1) An element of a program that tells the processor what to do.
Interrupt: (1) An event that causes the processor to leave its normal program
               so that some other program takes control, usually temporarily.
Interrupt enable register: (7) A location within an IA chip that determines
                               whether or not a selected event will cause an
                               interrupt.
Interrupt flag: (7) A signal within the IA indicating that a certain event
                    has requested that an interrupt take place.
Interrupt flag register: (7) A location within the IA where interrupt events
                             can be detected and turned off if desired.
Interrupt source: (7) The particular event that caused an interrupt.  Since
                      many things can do this, it's usually necessary to
                      identify the specific source of the interrupt.
Kernal: (2) Commodore's operating system.
Label, symbolic address: (8) A name identifying a memory location.
Latch: (7) A flag that "locks in."
Load: (1) To bring information from memory into the processor.  A load
          operation is a copying activity; the information still remains in
          memory.
Logical file number: (8) The identity of a file as used by the programmer.
Logical operator: (3) An operation that affects individual bits within a
                      byte:  AND, ORA, and EOR.
Logical shift or rotate: (4) A shift that does not preserve the sign of a
                             signed number.
Machine code: (1) Instructions written in machine language.
Machine language: (1) The set of commands that allow you to give instructions
                      to the processor.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "glossary_b_to_e_terms" which expands on previous block with B–E terms
- "glossary_machine_monitor_memory_rom" which expands on further machine/monitor/memory-related terms (M–R region)
- "glossary_registers_screen_stack_and_numbers" which expands on later entries on registers, stack, and numeric formats
