# The MOS 6567/6569 video controller (VIC-II) and its application in the Commodore 64 - Overview of 8 graphics modes selected by ECM (extended color), BMM (bitmap mode) and MCM (multicolor mode) bits: standard/multicolor text, standard/multicolor bitmap, ECM text, and three invalid combinations. Discusses sequencer implementation (8-bit shift register shifted every pixel, reload on g-access, XSCROLL delays reload 0-7 pixels) and difference in address generation for g-access under ECM/BMM settings (addresses for g-access vary: char generator vs bitmap addressing).

3.7.3 Graphics modes
--------------------

The graphics data sequencer is capable of 8 different graphics modes that
are selected by the bits ECM, BMM and MCM (Extended Color Mode, Bit Map
Mode and Multi Color Mode) in the registers $d011 and $d016 (of the 8
possible bit combinations, 3 are "invalid" and generate the same output,
the color black). The idle state is a bit special in that no c-accesses
occur in it and the sequencer uses "0" bits for the video matrix data.

The sequencer outputs the graphics data in every raster line in the area of
the display column as long as the vertical border flip-flop is reset (see
section 3.9.). Outside of the display column and if the flip-flop is set,
the last current background color is displayed (this area is normally
covered by the border). The heart of the sequencer is an 8 bit shift
register that is shifted by 1 bit every pixel and reloaded with new
graphics data after every g-access. With XSCROLL from register $d016 the
reloading can be delayed by 0-7 pixels, thus shifting the display up to 7
pixels to the right.

The address generator for the text/bitmap accesses (c- and g-accesses) has
basically 3 modes for the g-accesses (the c-accesses always follow the same
address scheme). In display state, the BMM bit selects either character
generator accesses (BMM=0) or bitmap accesses (BMM=1). In idle state, the
g-accesses are always done at video address $3fff. If the ECM bit is set,
the address generator always holds the address lines 9 and 10 low without
any other changes to the addressing scheme (e.g. the g-accesses in idle
state then occur at address $39ff).

The 8 graphics modes are now covered separately and the generated addresses
and the interpretation of the read data on c- and g-accesses is described.
This is followed by a description of the pecularities of the idle state.
For easy reference, the addresses are always given explicitly for every
mode although e.g. the c-accesses are always the same.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "standard_text_mode" which expands on ECM/BMM/MCM=0/0/0 address/data interpretation
- "idle_state_mode_details" which expands on g-access behavior while in idle state
