# Contents - Guidance on using graphics tablets and commercial graphics packages: the Koala Pad as an example, important selection criteria (what graphics mode the package uses; how pictures are retrieved from disk), useful features such as zoom mode and OOPS (undo), concerns about packages that limit colors or resolution, and palette mixing to extend apparent color choices.

USING A GRAPHICS TABLET 

A more popular way in which to enter graphics 
data into the Commodore 64 for use within the pro- 
gram is to use commercially available graphics 
packages to generate pictures. One of the most 
popular and useful of these is the Koala Pad. This 
package comes with a touch pad and software that 
allows you to easily generate background screens. 
Almost any type of graphics package will help speed 
up the process of generating graphics. 

A word of caution: before selecting a graphics 
package to aid with your drawings, it would be wise 
to be sure that it will fullfill your needs. There are 
two major pieces of information that you will need 
about the package: 

• What graphics mode does it use? 

• How can the picture be retrieved for m the disk? 

Different types of games will benefit from the Fig. 9-6. A grid for a vertically expanded sprite. 





— ~. ~ 

1 



52 




Fig. 9-7. A grid for a sprite that has been expanded both ftorizontallv and vertically. 



same mode. Otherwise, the data created will not be 
useful for your program. This sounds like good ad- 
vice in theory; however, you will probably find that 
most of the available packages will use the 
multicolor bitmapped mode. On the other hand, 
even if the program can not be used to generate 
data, it may be useful for testing color choices and 
to see how things will look. 

It is quite possible that you will find a graphics 
package that will seem to do everything that you 
would like it to, only to find later on that you can't 
get your picture back off the disk. It wouldn't seem 
to be very useful to create a picture if you can't use 
it. Some graphics packages use what appear to be 
protected file names to prevent you from retrieving 
your picture without using the software that created 
it. You should contact the manufacturer of the 
graphics package if there is no documentation on 
how to load the picture wit out their software. If 



you can get no satisfactory information from the 
manufacturer, or they claim that you have no right 
to know, you should not buy their software package. 

When shopping for a graphics package, one 
especially useful feature is a zoom mode. Using a 
zoom mode, you will normally be able to change in- 
dividual pixels on the screen with a minimum of ef- 
fort. This will allow you, among other things, to 
clean up a drawing that was made free-hand or 
create a shape pixel-by-pixel, which is too intricate 
to create in any other way. 

Be wary of a piece of software that will not 
allow you to use all 1 6 of the colors that the Com- 
modore 64 can display or does not use the full 
resolution of the screen. After all, there is no reason 
to sacrifice any of the abilities of your machine 
because of some other programmer's shortcomings. 
In fact, most good graphics programs will give you 
a pallette of more than 16 colors by giving you mix- 



53 



tures of the different colors in different patterns. 
This can give you a choice of many colors and 
shades of colors that you may not have been aware 
were possible. 

Another feature that you will learn to appreciate 
greatly is an OOPS command. This usually allows 
you to erase the last changes that you have made 
to your drawing. This is a very useful function when 
you wish to experiment with color changes and 
other types of changes or additions that you might 
not be sure you like. If you don't like your change, 
you simply give the OOPS command and your draw- 
ing is returned to the state it was in before the 
change. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "koala_pad_overview_and_file_format" which expands on detailed Koala Pad information and file format
- "sprite_maker_utility" which expands on creating sprites with supplied utilities
