# MACHINE - Immediate addressing (e.g., LDA #$34) embeds a value in the instruction (two bytes). Use immediate for constants but beware of overusing it (hard-coded values make porting harder). Some instructions like STA cannot use immediate mode.



Not Quite an Address:  Immediate Mode
-------------------------------------

Coding such as LDA #$34 does not reference a memory address.  Instead, it
designates a specific value (in this case, $34).  An instruction with
immediate addressing takes up two bytes:  one for the op code and the second
for the immediate value.

We have used immediate addressing several times.  It has a "natural" feel,
and it's fast and convenient.  There is one potential pitfall:  immediate
addressing is so easy that it may be abused.  Each time you code an immediate
address, ask yourself, "Could this value ever change?"  By writing a value
into a program, rather than a variable, you may be freezing that value
forever.

An example:  a program is written for a VIC-20, which has 22 columns on the
screen.  At various places in the program, values are compared to 22 (hex
16), and 22 is added or subtracted to various screen addresses.  In each
case, immediate mode addressing is used to provide the value of 22.  Some
time later, the programmer decides to convert to the Commodore 64, which has
40 columns on the screen.  The programmer must change each immediate mode
reference from 22 to 40 (hex 28).

                                                                         :75:

If the value 22 had been stored in a memory location so as to be used as a
variable, all this recoding would not be needed.  The moral is clear:
excessive use of immediate mode can call for extra programming work at a
later time.

There are certain instructions for which immediate addressing is not
possible.  For example, we can LDA #$00, that is, bring in the actual value
zero rather than the contents of an address, but we cannot STA immediate--we
must store the information somewhere in memory.



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "addition_program_using_subroutine" which expands on immediate ASCII constants for printing characters
