# Contents - Indirect addressing variants available on 6510: (Indirect),Y and (Indexed Indirect,X). Indirect addressing uses a pointer stored in zero page as two consecutive bytes (low then high). (Indirect),Y: assembler reads 16-bit address from zero page, then adds Y to form final address. (Indexed Indirect,X): adds X to zero-page pointer offset, then reads address from the resulting zero-page location. The 6510 lacks true general indirect memory addressing for most data ops; these two forms are the provided options.

Indirect Addressing with indexes 

So far, all of the addressing modes have as- 
sumed that you knew where the data you were in- 
terested in was ahead of time. Since this is not 
always the case, there needs to be a way for the com- 
puter to determine an address during program 
execution. 

Indirect addressing means that you are not tell- 
ing the microprocessor where the data that you want 
to use is, but rather you are telling the 
microprocessor where it can find the address of the 
data that you want. The indirect address will always 
be stored in zero page memory in two consecutive 
memory locations. The lower order byte of the ad- 
dress is stored in the first memory location, and the 
high order byte of the address is stored in the next 
location. This gives a 16 bit address, so that the data 
can be anywhere in the microprocessor's normal ad- 
dress space. 

When you give an indirect addressing com- 
mand, the operand will be the address in zero page 
that contains the first byte of the address of the pair 
of memory locations where the appropriate address 
is stored. It is important to reserve enough space 
in zero page RAM to hold all of the indirect ad- 
dresses that you may be generating. 

At this point, indirect addressing should seem 
pretty easy to use, but there is a catch. The 6510 
does not have true indirect addressing abilities for 
data movement or arithmetic instructions. Instead 
there are two subclasses of indirect addressing 
available. These are: 

• Indexed Indirect X 

• Indirect Indexed Y 

We will look at the second one first because it 
is the most often used. As is implied by the name 
indirect indexed Y, this command is a combination 
of indirect addressing and indexed addressing. As 



15 



was mentioned earlier, the command will have the 
address of where the address may be found. After 
the microprocessor generates an address from the 
two zero page memory locations, the contents of the 
Y register is added to the address to form the final 
address. The data at this final address can then be 
accessed. If the value of the Y register is 0, the com- 
mand will act like a true indirect addressing com- 
mand. You must be sure that the Y register is set 
to the desired value before executing this command, 
or you will never be sure of where the data is com- 
ing from (or going to) . 

In indexed indirect X addressing, the value of 
the X register is added to the zero page address of 
where the indirect address can be found. This new 
zero page address is then used to generate the final 
address of where the data can be located. If the X 
register is set to zero, this command will act like 
a normal indirect addressing command. The nor- 
mal use for this command is to use the X register 
as an index into a table of addresses located in zero 
page RAM. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "zero_page_addressing" which expands on indirection pointer must live in zero page
- "absolute_indexed_addressing" which expands on how final address is formed by adding index
