# byRiclianll - Chapter 4, Section 4.1: Overview of DOS information management tasks: keep track of free vs used sectors, assign names and locations to files, and track sector chains for files. DOS stores directory and BAM on track 18 (BAM at sector 0; directory entries in sectors 1-18), centering directory to minimize head movement.

CHAPTER  4 


DISKETTE  ORGAWIZATIOW 


4.1  Information  Management 

The  information  that  is  stored  on  a  floppy  disk  is  virtually  useless  unless  it  can  be  retriev- 
ed quickly.  As  a  result,  the  organization  and  management  of  information  is  one  of  the 
most  important  tasks  of  the  DOS.  To  do  an  efficient  job  of  management,  the  DOS  must 
be  able  to: 

1.  Keep  track  of  which  sectors  contain  data  and  which  are  still  empty  (available  for  use). 

2.  Assign  names  and  storage  locations  to  large  blocks  of  related  information  (files). 

3.  Keep  track  of  the  sequence  of  sectors  that  were  used  to  store  a  file. 

The  DOS  stores  most  of  this  information  in  the  directory  on  track  18,  halfway  between 
the  outermost  track  (1)  and  the  innermost  track  (35).  Centering  the  directory  serves 
to  minimize  head  movement  across  the  diskette  and  extends  the  life  of  both  the  drive 
and  the  media.  The  directory  is  subdivided  into  two  areas— the  map  showing  which  sec- 
tors are  in  use  and  which  are  free  (the  Block  Availability  Map  or  BAM)  and  directory 
entries.  The  BAM  resides  solely  on  sector  0  of  track  18.  It  informs  the  drive  as  to  what 
sectors  are  currently  in  use  and  where  subsequent  writing  to  the  diskette  can  safely 
take  place.  The  remaining  sectors  (1-18)  of  track  18  contain  directory  entries  (file  names, 
file  types,  and  pointers  to  where  files  are  stored  on  the  diskette). 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "bam_sector_dump_and_overview" which expands on BAM layout and example dump
- "directory_entries_overview_and_track18_sector1_example" which expands on directory entries layout and example (track 18 sector 1)
