# byRiclianll - INITIALIZE command: not formatting. Syntax: OPEN 15,8,15 ; PRINT#15,"I0" (or "I") ; CLOSE 15. INITIALIZE reads the disk ID and BAM into the drive's internal memory so DOS knows where to write next. Recommends initializing each time a disk is inserted (don't rely on autoinit). INITIALIZE clears the error channel and turns off flashing LED; retrieve error status before initializing if needed.

The  Initialize  Command 


Initialization  has  nothing  to  do  with  formatting.  APPLE™  owners  format  a  diskette  by 
"initializing"  it.  This  is  NOT  TRUE  with  Commodore.  Initializing  a  diskette  forces  the 
DOS  to  read  the  disk  ID  and  the  contents  of  the  BAM  and  store  them  in  the  drive's 
internal  memory.  The  BAM  establishes  where  the  next  available  sector  is  for  writing. 
Without  it  files  would  be  overwritten.  To  initialize  a  diskette  perform  the  following: 


21 


syntax:  open  15,  8,  15 
PRINT#15,  "10" 
CLOSE  15 

ALTERNATE :    PR I NT# 1 5 ,    " I " 

DOS  5. 1 :  >I0 

>I 

The  I  is  short  for  INITIALIZE.  The  drive  number  can  be  ignored  if  you  are  using  only 
one  1541.  The  drive  motor  purrs  for  a  few  seconds  and  then  settles  down.  It's  that  sim- 
ple. It  is  a  good  habit  to  initialize  a  diskette  each  time  you  insert  it  into  your  1541  drive. 
This  point  cannot  be  overemphasized.  Do  it  yourself.  Do  not  rely  upon  the  "autoinit" 
feature  of  the  drive.  Initialization  prevents  the  DOS  from  overwriting  files  in  the  event 
that  two  diskettes  with  identical  IDs  are  swapped.  The  drive  cannot  tell  the  difference 
between  two  diskettes  with  identical  IDs  since  it  is  the  ID  that  the  DOS  uses  to  iden- 
tify a  diskette.  Initialization  also  assures  you  that  a  diskette  is  properly  seated  in  the 
drive  before  use. 

The  1541  drive  has  a  built  in  autoinitialization  feature.  Once  it  encounters  an  error  it 
will  retry  a  disk  operation  several  times.  Often  it  can  recover  from  an  error  on  its  own. 
If  it  fails,  it  gives  up.  Before  doing  so,  though,  it  will  do  a  "bump."  On  a  bump  the 
read/write  head  is  stepped  outwards  45  tracks  (slight  overkill)  to  assure  that  it  is  on 
track  1.  The  drive  clatters  when  a  protrusion  on  the  stepper  motor's  drive  pulley  bumps 
up  against  a  mechanical  stop.  (It  really  isn't  a  melt  down.)  The  head  then  steps  inwards 
to  track  18  and  the  DOS  awaits  further  instructions.  Self  initialization  avoids  this  scenario. 
Initialize  every  time  you  insert  a  diskette  into  the  drive. 

Initialization  clears  the  error  channel  and  turns  off  the  flashing  red  LED.  Unless,  of 
course,  you  are  trying  to  initialize  an  unformatted  diskette  or  forgot  to  put  one  in  the 
drive  to  begin  with.  Clearing  the  error  channel  destroys  the  error  status  the  DOS 
prepared  for  you.  If  error  checking  is  important,  retrieve  the  error  message  first;  then 
initialize  the  drive. 

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "bam_sector_dump_and_overview" which expands on BAM resides on track 18 sector 0 and is read into memory by INITIALIZE
