# MACHINE - Explanation of basic binary concepts: digital circuits have two states; representation of ON/OFF as 1/0; bits and bytes; grouping eight bits as a byte; bit numbering (bit 0 at right to bit 7 at left) and reasons for that numbering.

The Inner Workings of Microcomputers
------------------------------------

All computers contain a large number of electrical circuits.  Within any
binary computer, these circuits may be in only two states:  "on" or "off."

Technicians will tell you that "on" usually means full voltage on the circuit
concerned, and "off" means no voltage.  There's no need for volume control
adjustments within a digital computer:  each circuit is either fully on or
fully off.

The word "binary" means "based on two," and everything that happens within
the computer is based on the two possibilities of each circuit:  on or off.
We can identify these two conditions in any of several ways:

                                    ON or OFF
                                  TRUE or FALSE
                                   YES or NO
                                     1 or 0

The last description, 1 or 0, is quite useful.  It is compact and numeric.
If we had a group of eight circuits within the computer, some of which were
"on" and others "off," we could describe their conditions with an expression
such as:

  11000111

This would signify that the two leftmost wires were on, the next three off,
and the remaining three on.  The value 11000111 looks like a number; in fact,
it is a binary number in which each digit is 0 or 1.  It should not be
confused with the equivalent decimal value of slightly over 11 million; the
digits would look the same, but in decimal each digit could have a value from
0 to 9.  To avoid confusion with decimal numbers, binary numbers are often
preceded by a percent sign, so that the number might be shown as %11000111.

Each digit of a binary number is called a bit, which is short for "binary
digit."  The number shown above has eight bits; a group of eight bits is a
byte.  Bits are often numbered from the right, starting at zero.  The right-
hand bit of the above number would be called "bit 0," and the left-hand bit
would be called "bit 7."  This may seem odd, but there's a good mathematical
reason for using such a numbering scheme.

                                                                          :3:

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "hexadecimal_notation" which expands on shows how humans use hex to represent binary groups
- "number_ranges" which expands on applies bit weights to compute numeric ranges for addresses and data
