# COMMODORE 64 - INPUT ["prompt";] <variable list>: prompts user with ? (and optional quoted prompt), waits for input terminated by RETURN. Behavior: semicolon required between prompt and variables; entering blank RETURN leaves variable unchanged; extra input triggers ?EXTRA IGNORED; INPUT can't be used outside a program (needs buffer). Examples.

  INPUT

  TYPE: Statement
  FORMAT: INPUT [ "<prompt>" ; ] <variable list>

    Action: This is a statement that lets the person RUNning the program
  "feed" information into the computer. When executed, this statement
  PRINTs a question mark (?) on the screen, and positions the cursor 1
  space to the right of the question mark. Now the computer waits, cursor
  blinking, for the operator to type in the answer and press the <RETURN>
  key.
    The word INPUT may be followed by any text contained in quote marks
  (""). This text is PRINTed on the screen, followed by the question mark.
    After the text comes a semicolon (;) and the name of one or more
  variables separated by commas. This variable is where the computer
  stores the information that the operator types. The variable can be any
  legal variable name, and you can have several different variable
  names, each for a different input.

  EXAMPLES of INPUT Statement:

    100 INPUT A
    110 INPUT B, C, D
    120 INPUT "PROMPT"; E

    When this program RUNs, the question mark appears to prompt the
  operator that the Commodore 64 is expecting an input for line 100. Any
  number typed in goes into A, for later use in the program. If the answer
  typed was not a number, the ?REDO FROM START message appears, which means
  that a string was received when a number was expected.
    If the operator just hits <RETURN> without typing anything, the vari-
  able's value doesn't change.
    Now the next question mark, for line 110, appears. If we type only
  one number and hit the <RETURN>, Commodore 64 will now display 2
  question marks (??), which means that more input is required. You can








  54   BASIC LANGUAGE VOCABULARY
~


  just type as many inputs as you need separated by commas, which prevents
  the double question mark from appearing. If you type more data than the
  INPUT statement requested, the ?EXTRA IGNORED message appears, which
  means that the extra items you typed were not put into any variables.
    Line 120 displays the word PROMPT before the question mark appears. The
  semicolon is required between the prompt and any list of variables.
    The INPUT statement can never be used outside a program. The Commodore
  64 needs space for a buffer for the INPUT variables, the same space that
  is used for commands.

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "get_statement" which expands on GET vs INPUT for keystroke reading
