# ********* - Numeric parameter and address parsing and memory-access statements: GETBYTC (get byte 0–255), VAL (convert string to floating point), GETNUM (get 16-bit address and 8-bit parameter for POKE/WAIT), GETADR (convert FP to unsigned 16-bit address), PEEK (read memory byte and return as FP), POKE (write byte to memory), and FUWAIT/WAIT (poll a memory location with mask and optional pattern using AND/XOR). Explains range checks, conversion to/from floating point, and use cases for WAIT.

Input a Parameter Whose Value Is Between 0 and 255

This routine reads numeric ASCII program text, converts it to an
integer, checks that it is in the range 0-255, and stores it in the .X
register.  This routine can be useful for reading parameters from a
USR statement or new commands.

47021         $B7AD          VAL
Perform VAL

The VAL routine obtains the string pointer, and reads the string one
character at a time until an invalid character is found (ASCII
numbers, sign character, a single decimal point, exponent, and spaces
are all valid).  Then the string is changed to floating point.  If no
valid characters are found, a 0 is returned.

47083         $B7EB          GETNUM
Get a 16-Bit Address Parameter and an 8-Bit Parameter (for POKE and WAIT)

This routine gets the next numeric parameter from the current place in
program text.  The routine evaluates it, checks that it is a positive
integer within the range 0-65535, and changes it from floating point
to a two-byte integer in 20-21 ($14-$15).  It checks for and skips a
comma, then gets a one-byte integer parameter in the .X register.  The
routine is used to get the parameters for POKE an WAIT.

47095         $B7F7          GETADR
Convert a Floating Point Number to an Unsigned Two-Byte Integer

This routine checks the number in the Floating Point Accumulator to
make sure that it is a positive number less than 65536, and then calls
the subroutine which conerts floatin point to integer.  It is used to
get address parameters, for commands such as PEEK.

47117         $B80D          PEEK
Perform PEEK

PEEK reads the address parameter and converts it to a pointer.  Then
it gets the byte pointed to into the .Y register, and calls the part
of POS that converts a single integer in .Y to a floating point
number.

47140         $B824          POKE
Perform POKE

POKE gets a pointer to the address parameter, and stores the next
parameter there.

47149         $B82D          FUWAIT
Perform WAIT

WAIT gets an address parameter and an integer parameter to use as a
mask.  WAIT then looks for an optional parameter to use as a pattern
for the exclusive OR.  Then, the address location is read, its value
is exclusive ORed with the optional pattern value (or 0 if there is
none).  This value is ANDed with the mask value.  The command loops
continuously until the result is not- zero.

The purpose of this command is to allow the program to watch a
location which can be changed by the system or by outside hardware
(such as the software clock or keycode value locations).

The AND function lets you check if a bit changes from 0 to 1, while
the EOR function allows you to check if a bit changes from 1 to 0.
For more information, see the article "All About the Wait
Instruction," by Louis Sander and Doug Ferguson, in COMPUTE!'s First
Book of Commodore 64.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "string_allocation_and_manipulation" which expands on VAL converts string text to floating point using FIN/FINLOG
- "floating_point_arithmetic_and_constants" which expands on GETADR/PEEK/POKE convert between FP and integer formats used by floating point routines
