# Contents - Four classes of 6510 instructions: Data movement (loads, stores, transfers), Arithmetic (ADC, SBC, logical ops, shifts/rotates), Testing (CMP and other nondestructive tests that set status flags), and Flow of control (conditional branches and unconditional jumps/JSR).

INSTRUCTION TYPES 

There are 4 classes of instructions in the 6510. 
These are: 

• Data movement 

• Arithmetic 

• Testing 

• Flow of control 



13 



Lata movement instructions are instructions that 
cruse a value to be loaded from memory, stored 
into memory, or transferred from one register to 
another. There are a number of options as to how 
the address of the byte to be loaded will be deter- 
mined. In the load accumulator instruction, LDA, 
there are eight different addressing modes that can 
be used to determine which byte to load. The dif- 
ferent addressing modes are explained in the follow- 
ing section. 

A rithmetic instructions are used to modify data 
in some way. This class of instruction includes 
logical operations, such as the AND and ORA in- 
structions. There are instructions that allow a byte 
to be rotated as well as addition and subtraction 
commands. As with the data movement instruc- 
tions, most of the available addressing modes can 
be used by the arithmetic instructions. 

fisting instructions allow a nondestructive test 
of data in the microprocessor. For instance, when 
a CMP instruction is used to check a value in 
the ACCUMULATOR, the data in the 
ACCUMULATOR will not be changed in any way. 
The bits in the STATUS register will be changed 
in the same way as if the data to be compared was 
subtracted from the ACCUMULATOR. These in- 
structions are generally used to modify the STATUS 
register prior to executing a branch instruction. 

Flow of control instructions are the branching 
and jump instructions. These are used to change the 
order in which different sections of code are ex- 
ecuted. The branch instructions are all conditional 
branching instructions. That is, each instruction 
checks one of the bits in the status register and, 
depending on its value, will either branch to the in- 
struction pointed to in the operand or execute the 
next instruction in line. 

Jump and jump to subroutine instructions also 
fall into the flow of control category. These are 
known as absolute commands because they do not 
check any conditions before performing a jump. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "addressing_modes_overview" which expands on addressing modes available to instructions
- "implied_addressing" which expands on examples of implied data movement instructions (e.g., TAX)
