# MACHINE - Alphabetical list of many 6502 instructions with short mnemonic descriptions: ADC, AND, ASL, BCC/BCS/BEQ/BIT/BMI/BNE/BPL/BRK/BVC/BVS, CLC/CLD/CLI/CLV/CMP/CPX/CPY, DEC/DEX/DEY, EOR, INC/INX/INY, JMP/JSR — presents names and brief actions.

Indexed Absolute Addressing--(X, Y indexing)--This form of addressing is used
in conjunction with X and Y index register and is referred to as "Absolute,
X", and "Absolute, Y".  The effective address is formed by adding the
contents of X and Y to the address contained in the second and third bytes of
the instruction.  This mode allows the index register to contain the index or
count value and the instruction to contain the base address.  This type of
indexing allows any location referencing and the index to modify multiple
fields resulting in reduced coding and execution time.

Implied Addressing--In the implied addressing mode, the address containing
the operand is implicitly stated in the operation code of the instruction.

Relative Addressing--Relative addressing is used only with branch
instructions and establishes a destination for the conditional branch.

The second byte of the instruction becomes the operand which is an "Offset"
added to the contents of the lower eight bits of the program counter when the
counters is set at the next instruction.  The range of the offset is -128 to
+127 bytes from the next instruction.

                                                                        :149:

Indexed Indirect Addressing--In indexed indirect addressing (referred to as
"Indirect, X"), the second byte of the instruction is added to the contents
of the X index register, discarding the carry.  The result of this addition
points to a memory location on page zero whose contents are the low order
eight bits of the effective address.  The next memory location in page zero
contains the high order eight bits of the effective address.  Both memory
locations specifying the high and low order bytes of the effective address
must be in page zero.

Indirect Indexed Addressing--In indirect indexed addressing (referred to as
"Indirect, Y"), the second byte of the instruction points to a memory
location in page zero.  The contents of this memory location are added to the
contents of the Y index register, the result being the low order eight bits
of the effective address.  The carry from this addition is added to the
contents of the next page zero memory location, the result being the high
order eight bits of the effective address.

Absolute Indirect--The second byte of the instruction contains the low order
eight bits of a memory location.  The high order eight bits of that memory
location is contained in the third byte of the instruction.  The contents of
the fully specified memory location are the low order byte of the effective
address.  The next memory location contains the high order byte of the
effective address which is loaded into the sixteen bits of the program
counter.


Instruction Set--Alphabetic Sequence
------------------------------------

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "instruction_alphabetic_list_part2" which expands on Continuation of alphabetic instruction list
