# MACHINE - Review of previously covered instructions and their categories: Load (LDA/LDX/LDY), Store (STA/STX/STY), Compare (CMP/CPX/CPY). Notes about register specializations (INX/INY/DEX/DEY for X/Y, A as accumulator for arithmetic). Review of subroutine calls (JSR/RTS) and BRK usage for debugging. Discussion of branch instructions (eight of them) and their limited short-range hops (around a hundred memory locations).

Instructions:  A Review
-----------------------

We have looked at the three data registers--A, X, and Y--and have seen three
types of operation we can perform with them:

  Load:     LDA  LDX  LDY

  Store:    STA  STX  STY

  Compare:  CMP  CPX  CPY

Up to this point, the registers have identical functions, and we can use any
of them for any of these functions.  But new instructions are creeping in
that give a different personality to each of the three.

We have noted that INX, INY, DEX, and DEY for increment and decrement are
restricted to X and Y only; and we've also mentioned that X and Y can be used
for indexing.  Soon, we'll start to examine some of the functions of the A
register, which is often called the accumulator because of its ability to do
arithmetic.

We have seen JSR, which allows us to call a subroutine of prewritten
instructions.  We've used RTS, which says, "Go back to the calling point,"
even if the calling point is a BASIC program.  And we've almost abandoned the
BRK instruction, which stops the program and goes to the machine language
monitor.  BRK will be useful in checking out programs.  Specifically, we can
stop a program at any time by inserting a BRK instruction, allowing us to see
whether the program is behaving correctly and whether it has done the things
we planned.

There are eight branch instructions.  They have already been discussed, but
there is one additional piece of information that is important to keep in
mind.  All branches are good only for short hops of up to a hundred memory
locations or so.  So long as we write short program, that won't be a
limitation; but we'll look at this more closely in Chapter 5.



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "comparison_instructions_and_branch_usage" which expands on Compare + branch examples
- "logical_operations_overview" which expands on Next topic: logical instructions that operate on A
