# Contents - Purpose of interrupts in C64: timing and program control (real-time clock, keyboard buffer), sprite collision signaling, and raster line notifications. Concept of asynchronous interrupt vs polling and example use-case (collision causing explosion via interrupt jump vector).

Chapter 6 
Working with Interrupts 



In the Commodore 64 interrupts serve as a major 
source of timing and program control. The inter- 
rupts are normally used to maintain the real time 
clocks and the type ahead keyboard buffer. Inter- 
rupts can also be used to signal sprite collisions and 
inform the program when a specific scan line has 
been reached. 

To best understand what an interrupt is, con- 
sider a normal program. The microprocessor reads 
its instructions one at a time and executes them in 
order. Whatever it is told to do first, is done first. 
If there is a certain condition that makes it necessary 
to perform a certain operation immediately, this con- 
dition must be repeatedly checked throughout the 
program to ensure it is taken care of promptly. For 
example, a collision between a bullet and a player 
sprite should immediately initiate an explosion se- 
quence. In a normal program, you have to monitor 
the collision status register constantly and take ap- 
propriate action. 

The alternative is to let the hardware check for 
the collision. When a collision occurs, the VIC II 
chip can send an interrupt request to the 



microprocessor. If interrupts are enabled, the pro- 
cessor will execute an indirect jump through loca- 
tion $FFFE when it finishes executing its current 
instruction. Location $FFFE usually points to a 
point in ROM that has an indirect jump instruction 
for a point in RAM. In the Commodore 64, the 
RAM location that ultimately will direct the jump 
is $0314. If the address of your routine to initiate 
the explosion sequence is placed in locations $0314 
and $0315, this sequence will only be called on 
when a collision is detected. 

Using an interrupt for this purpose relieves the 
main program of scanning the collision register con- 
stantly. Because of this, less of a burden is placed 
on the microprocessor during the main program. 

Interrupts should be used for the part of your 
program that needs the highest priority in terms of 

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "6510_architecture_and_registers" which expands on vector locations and status bits (IRQ/NMI)
- "working_with_interrupts_and_raster" which expands on detailed raster interrupt usage
