# COMMODORE 64 - Explains interrupt status register at 53273 ($D019) and interrupt enable register at 53274 ($D01A). Status bits: bit0=IRQ on raster compare, bit1=sprite-data collision, bit2=sprite-sprite collision, bit3=light-pen, bit7=global IRQ latch. Bits are latched when set and must be cleared by writing a 1 to that bit. To actually get an IRQ the corresponding bit in the enable register must be set. Describes using interrupts for split-screen modes and dynamic display changes and notes BASIC is usually too slow — use machine language for display interrupts.

  INTERRUPT STATUS REGISTER

    The interrupt status register shows the current status of any interrupt
  source. The current status of bit 2 of the interrupt register will be a 1
  when two sprites hit each other. The same is true, in a corresponding 1
  to 1 relationship, for bits 0-3 listed in the chart below. Bit 7 is also
  set with a 1, whenever an interrupt occurs.
    The interrupt status register is located at 53273 ($D019) and is as
  follows:

    LATCH  BIT#             DESCRIPTION
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
    IRST    0   Set when current raster count = stored raster count
    IMDC    1   Set by SPRITE-DATA collision (1st one only, until reset)
    IMMC    2   Set by SPRITE-SPRITE collision (1st one only, until reset)
     ILP    3   Set by negative transition of light pen (1 per frame)
     IRQ    7   Set by latch set and enabled
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Once an interrupt bit has been set, it's "latched" in and must be
  cleared by writing a 1 to that bit in the interrupt register when you're
  ready to handle it. This allows selective interrupt handling, without
  having to store the other interrupt bits.
    The INTERRUPT ENABLE REGISTER is located at 53274 ($D01A). It has the
  same format as the interrupt status register. Unless the corresponding
  bit in the interrupt enable register is set to a 1, no interrupt from
  that source will take place. The interrupt status register can still be
  polled for information, but no interrupts will be generated.
    To enable an interrupt request the corresponding interrupt enable bit
  (as shown in the chart above) must be set to a 1.
    This powerful interrupt structure lets you use split screen modes. For
  instance you can have half of the screen bit mapped, half text, more than
  8 sprites at a time, etc. The secret is to use interrupts properly. For
  example, if you want the top half of the screen to be bit mapped and the
  bottom to be text, just set the raster compare register (as explained
  previously) for halfway down the screen. When the interrupt occurs, tell
  the VIC-II chip to get characters from ROM, then set the raster compare
  register to interrupt at the top of the screen. When the interrupt occurs
  at the top of the screen, tell the VIC-II chip to get characters from RAM
  (bit map mode).
    You can also display more than 8 sprites in the same way. Unfortunately
  BASIC isn't fast enough to do this very well. So if you want to start
  using display interrupts, you should work in machine language.

                                                 PROGRAMMING GRAPHICS   151
~



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "raster_register_usage_and_raster_compare" which expands on setting raster compare to generate interrupts
- "sprite_to_sprite_collision_register_and_behavior" which expands on sprite collision bits are latched in status register
