# COMMODORE 64 - List of what's included in the manual: BASIC dictionary, machine language overview, KERNAL, I/O programming (peripherals, disk/cassette/printer/modem), graphics (sprites, characters, bitmaps), sound (SID), languages (CP/M), and other features.



                                     ix
~


    What you can do with this book is to find a considerable amount of
  valuable programming reference information written in easy to read,
  plain English with the programmer's jargon explained. On the other hand
  the programming professional will find all the information needed to use
  the capabilities of the COMMODORE 64 effectively.

  WHAT'S INCLUDED?

    o Our complete "BASIC dictionary" includes Commodore BASIC language
      commands, statements and functions listed in alphabetical order.
      We've created a "quick list" which contains all the words and their
      abbreviations. This is followed by a section containing a more
      detailed definition of each word along with sample BASIC programs
      to illustrate how they work.
    o If you need an introduction to using machine language with BASIC
      programs our layman's overview will get you started.
    o A powerful feature of all Commodore computers is called the KERNAL.
      It helps insure that the programs you write today can also be used
      on your Commodore computer of tomorrow.
    o The Input/Output Programming section gives you the opportunity to
      use your computer to the limit. It describes how to hook-up and use
      everything from lightpens and joysticks to disk drives, printers,
      and telecommunication devices called modems.
    o You can explore the world of SPRITES, programmable characters, and
      high resolution graphics for the most detailed and advanced animated
      pictures in the microcomputer industry.
    o You can also enter the world of music synthesis and create your own
      songs and sound effects with the best built-in synthesizer available
      in any personal computer.
    o If you're an experienced programmer, the soft load language section
      gives you information about the COMMODORE 64's ability to run CP/M*
      and high level languages. This is in addition to BASIC.

    Think of your COMMODORE 64 PROGRAMMER'S REFERENCE GUIDE as a useful
  tool to help you and you will enjoy the -hours of programming ahead
  of you.




  -----------
  * CP/M is a registered trademark of Digital Research, Inc.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "kernal_overview" which expands on KERNAL routines and use
- "graphics_overview" which expands on sprites, character and bitmap graphics
- "sound_overview" which expands on SID sound and music section
