# ********* - Introduction describing what a memory map is, how the Commodore 64 uses ROM and RAM, the role of OS and BASIC, and why a memory map is useful for PEEK/POKE and machine-language programming.

::::::::::::::::
::Introduction::
::::::::::::::::

To many computer users, the concept of a memory map may be an
unfamiliar one.  Simply stated, it is a guide to your computer's
internal hardware and software.  A memory map can help you use the
PEEK and POKE instructions to extend your BASIC programming powers.
If you plan to do machine language programming, it is necessary that
you be able to find your way around the system.

Many computer owners think of a program as something they buy at a
store and feed into the computer so that it will let them play games,
or do word processing, or keep financial records.  But this type of
applications software is by no means the only kind.

It is important to remember that a computer cannot do anything without
some kind of program.  When the computer displays the READY prompt, or
blinks the cursor, or displays the letters that you type, it can only
do so by executing a program.  In the examples shown above, it is the
master control program, the Operating System (OS), which is being
executed.

When you give the computer a command such as LOAD, the BASIC
interpreter program translates the English-like request to the
language of numbers which the computer understands.  The Operating
System and BASIC interpreter programs are contained in permanent Read
Only Memory (ROM), and are available as soon as you turn the power on.
Without them, your computer would be a rather expensive paperweight.

This permanent software co-exists inside your computer with the
applications program that you load.  Since the system software
performs many of the same functions as the applications program (such
as reading information from the keyboard and displaying it on the
screen), it is often possible for the applications program to make use
of certain parts of the Operating System.  This not only makes the
task of the programmer easier, but in come cases it allows him or her
to do things that otherwise would not be possible.

The Commodore 64 also has hardware support chips which enable the
graphics display, sound synthesis, and communications with external
devices.  Since these chips are addressed like memory, they occupy
space in our map.  Control over these chips, and the graphics, sound,
and I/O functions they make possible, can only be accomplished by
manipulation of the memory addresses which correspond to these
devices.  Therefore, a guide to these addresses is necessary in order
to take advantage of the graphics, music, and communications power
that they offer.

The purpose of this book is to describe the memory locations used by
the system, and to show, wherever possible, how to utilize them in
your own programs.  The book should clear up some of the mystery
surrounding the way your computer works.

How to Use This Book

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "chapter1_zero_page_and_basic_working_storage" which expands on start of detailed memory map entries (zero page and beyond)
