# byRiclianll - Chapter 1 introduction: purpose of the manual, intended audience, scope, relationship to the 1541 User's Manual, authors' disassembly work and research notes.

Ignorance  is  a  precious  thing. 
Once  lost,  it  can  never  be  regained. 


CHAPTER  1 


IWTRODUCTIOW 

This  manual  is  intended  to  supplement  the  documentation  provided  in  the  15U1  User's 
Manual.  Although  this  manual  is  primarily  designed  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  in- 
termediate to  advanced  programmer,  it  will  also  be  of  interest  to  the  novice  Commodore 
user  who  wants  to  know  more  about  how  his  1541  disk  drive  works.  This  manual  is  not 
intended  to  replace  the  documentation  provided  by  Commodore  Business  Machines,  Inc. 
and  the  reader  is  assumed  to  be  relatively  familiar  with  the  contents  of  the  15U1  User's 
Manual.  For  the  sake  of  continuity  and  clarity,  some  of  the  information  covered  in  the 
15Jtl  User's  Manual  is  also  presented  here.  However,  the  majority  of  the  information 
presented  in  this  manual  is  original  and  is  the  result  of  intensive  disassembly  and  an- 
notation of  the  1541's  DOS  by  the  authors.  Some  information  is  based  on  articles  and 
notes  published  in  a  variety  of  publications  as  well  as  discussions  with  other 
knowledgeable  disk  experts. 

This  manual  was  not  prepared  with  the  assistance  of  Commodore  Business  Machines, 
Inc.  Although  we  cannot  guarantee  the  accuracy  of  all  the  information  presented  in  this 
manual,  the  material  has  been  thoroughly  researched  and  tested. 

There  were  several  reasons  for  writing  Inside  Commodore  DOS: 

1.  lb  correct  errors  and  omissions  in  the  15J^1  User's  Manual. 

2.  lb  help  you  make  more  effective  use  of  your  disk  drive. 

3.  lb  provide  complete  information  on  diskette  formatting. 

4.  lb  provide  complete  information  on  the  storage  of  files. 

5.  lb  allow  you  to  read  and  write  data  in  non-standard  ways. 

6.  lb  help  you  make  a  backup  copy  of  your  "protected"  diskettes. 

7.  lb  help  you  recover  damaged  diskettes. 

8.  lb  help  you  understand  the  operation  of  your  disk  drive. 

Although  this  manual  focuses  primarily  on  the  1541  disk  drive,  much  of  the  information 
also  applies  to  other  Commodore  disk  drives. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "programs_listing_and_restrictions" which expands on program listings and restrictions
- "disk_housekeeping_overview" which expands on topics the manual will cover (e.g., formatting, recovery)
