# Contents - Koala Pad specifics: hardware overview (4" x 4" active area, 256x256 resolution, plugs into joystick port as paddles) and the Koala file format details (saved filenames prefixed with character $81 (inverted spade), followed by 'PIC' and a picture letter and space).

The following section will give some informa- 
tion about the Koala Pad from Koala Technologies. 
Some of the information has come from the 
manufacturer and is not in the documentation that 
comes with the package. This is not by any means 
the only software package that will aid in game 
design; it is only being used as an example. A 
number of manufacturers have recendy released 
light pens with graphics software, which may be 
useful. There are also digitizing tablets, joystick 
controlled graphics software, and keyboard con- 
trolled graphics software, which might be suitable. 
To attempt to evaluate all of the different packages 
is beyond the scope of this book. The preceding in- 
formation should aid in your evaluation of a product 
in the stores, and the following information on the 
Koala Pad should show you what type of informa- 
tion you will need to properly use the package of 
your choice. 

Using a Koala Pad 

The Koala Pad is a touch sensitive tablet with 
an active area of 4" by 4" and a resolution of 256 
by 256 points. The pad plugs into one of the joystick 
ports on the Commodore 64 and is treated as a pair 
of game paddles by the software. 

File format. Before you try to use the data 
created on the Koala Pad, you will want to convert 
the name of the file to something more usable. 
When the software saves a screen to the disk, it 
precedes your file name with a single byte whose 
value is $81. This character prints on the screen as 



an inverted spade and is inaccessible from the 
keyboard. Koala uses this character as a flag to iden- 
tify files that it has saved on the disk. This character 
is followed by the character string PIC, which is 
followed by a picture letter and a space. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "koala_filename_utils_and_memory_map" which expands on utilities to change Koala file names and memory layout of Koala files
- "display_pic_usage_and_relocation" which expands on using the DISPLAY PIC program to show Koala images
