# The MOS 6567/6569 video controller (VIC-II) and its application in the Commodore 64 - Light pen (LP) input behavior: negative edge latches current raster beam position into LPX ($D013) and LPY ($D014) — LPX upper 8 bits of 9-bit X, LPY lower 8 bits of 9-bit Y. Only one negative edge per frame is recognized (trigger released at next vertical blank). LP line shares keyboard matrix so can be triggered by software via CIA port B ($DC01/$DC03), enabling software measurement of current X position. LPX results correspond to sprite X coordinate conventions (resolution 2 pixels horizontally). VIC can optionally generate an interrupt on LP negative edge.

3.11. Lightpen
--------------

On a negative edge on the LP input, the current position of the raster beam
is latched in the registers LPX ($d013) and LPY ($d014). LPX contains the
upper 8 bits (of 9) of the X position and LPY the lower 8 bits (likewise of
9) of the Y position. So the horizontal resolution of the light pen is
limited to 2 pixels.

Only one negative edge on LP is recognized per frame. If multiple edges
occur on LP, all following ones are ignored. The trigger is not released
until the next vertical blanking interval.

As the LP input of the VIC is connected to the keyboard matrix as are all
lines of the joystick ports, it can also be controlled by software. This is
done with bit 4 of port B of CIA A ($dc01/$dc03). This allows to determine
the current X position of the raster beam by triggering an LP edge and
reading from LPX afterwards (the VIC has no register that would allow
reading the X position directly). This can e.g. be used to synchronize
raster interrupt routines on exact cycles.

The values you get from the LPX register can be calculated from the sprite
coordinates of the timing diagrams in section 3.6.3. The reference point is
the end of the cycle in which the LP line is triggered. E.g. if you trigger
LP in cycle 20, you get the value $1e in LPX, corresponding to the sprite
coordinate $03c (LPX contains the upper 8 bits of the 9 bit X coordinate).

The VIC can also additionally trigger an interrupt on a negative edge on
the LP pin (see next section), likewise only once per frame.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "x_coordinates" which expands on measuring X position by triggering LP and reading LPX
- "vic_interrupts" which expands on LP interrupt source bit and latching behavior
