# - C64 I/O Map (Mapping The Commodore 64) - Uses of raster interrupts for scrolling zones, and descriptions of other IRQ sources: the light pen interrupt (how the light pen triggers an IRQ and reading its position from $D013-$D014), the sprite-foreground collision interrupt (bit for sprite touching foreground graphics), and the sprite-sprite collision interrupt (sprite touching another sprite). Also explains that the corresponding collision registers at $D01F and $D01E report which sprites are involved.

                          Besides enabling the creation of mixed graphics-modes screens, the
                          Raster Compare Interrupt is also useful for creating scrolling zones,
                          so that some parts of the screen can be fine-scrolled while the rest
                          remains stationary.

                          Bit 1 enables the light pen interrupt.  This interrupt can occur when
                          the light of the raster beam strikes the light-sensitive device in the
                          pen's tip, causing it to close the fire button switch on joystick
                          Controller Port #1.

                          The light pen interrupt affords a method of signaling to a program
                          that the pen is being held to the screen, and that its position can be
                          read.  Some light pens provide a push-button switch which grounds one
                          of the other lines on the joystick port.  This switch can be pressed
                          by the user as an additional signal that the pen is properly
                          positioned.  Its location can then be read in the light pen position
                          registers (53267-8, $D013-4).

                          Bit 2 enables the sprite-foreground collision interrupt.  This
                          interrupt can occur if one of the sprite character's dots is touching
                          one of the dots from the foreground display of either text character
                          or bitmap graphics.

                          Bit 3 enables the sprite-sprite collision interrupt, which can occur
                          if one of the sprite character's dots is touching one of the dots of
                          another sprite character.

                          These two interrupts are useful for games, where such collisions often
                          require that some action be taken immediately.  Once the interrupt
                          signals that a collision has occurred, the interrupt routine can check
                          the Sprite- Foreground Collision Register at 53279 ($D01F), or the
                          Sprite-Sprite Collision Register at 53278 ($D01E), to see which sprite
                          or sprites are involved in the collision.  See the entry for those
                          locations for more details on collisions.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "irqmask_register_overview" which expands on The IRQ mask bits that enable these interrupts (bits 1–3)
- "raster_compare_irq_and_raster_scan_basics" which expands on Raster interrupts as another VIC-II interrupt source (bit 0)
