# MACHINE - Lists key machine language monitor commands and their meanings: .X to exit to BASIC, .M to display memory ranges, .R to display registers, .G to go/start program at address, and warns about .S/.L save/load until familiar with BASIC pointers. Emphasizes monitors don't accept BASIC commands and BASIC won't accept MLM commands.


MLM Commands
------------

The machine language monitor is now waiting for you to enter a new command.
The old BASIC commands don't work any more; LIST or NEW or SYS are not known
to the MLM.  We'll list some popular commands in a moment.  First, let's
discuss the command that takes us back to BASIC.

                                                                         :16:

.X exits the MLM and returns to the BASIC monitor.  Try it.  Remember to
press RETURN after you've typed the X, of course.  You will return to the
BASIC system, and the BASIC monitor will type READY.  You're back in familiar
territory.  Now go back to the monitor with SYS4 or SYS8 or MONITOR as the
case may be.  BASIC ignores spaces:  it doesn't matter if you type SYS8 or
SYS 8; just use the right number for your machine  (4 for PET/CBM, 8 for
VIC/64).

Remember:  BASIC commands are no good in the MLM, and machine language
monitor commands (such as .X) are no good in BASIC.  At first, you'll give
the wrong commands at the wrong time because it's hard to keep track of which
monitor system is active.  If you type in an MLM command when you're in
BASIC, you'll probably get a ?SYNTAX ERROR reply.  If you type in a BASIC
command when you're in the machine language monitor, you'll probably get a
question mark in the line you typed.

Some other MLM commands are as follows (the prompting period is included):

  .M 1000 1010   (display memory from hex 1000 to 1010)
  .R             (display registers ... again!)
  .G 033C        (go to 033C and start running a program)

Do not enter this last (.G) command.  There is no program at address 033C
yet, so the computer would execute random instructions and we would lose
control.

There are two other fundamental instructions what we won't use yet:  they are
.S for save and .L for load.  These are tricky.  Until you learn about BASIC
pointers (Chapter 6), leave them alone.



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "monitor_register_display" which expands on register display that appears when you enter the MLM
- "entering_program_with_mlm" which expands on use of .M and .G when entering and running a program
