# COMMODORE 64 - Details the two collision detection types and their registers: 1) MOB-to-MOB collisions set bits MnM in MOB-MOB COLLISION register 30 ($1E) when non-transparent pixels from two MOBs coincide. Collision bits for all collided MOBs are set and remain until the register is read (read clears them). MOB collisions are detected even off-screen. 2) MOB-to-display (MOB-DATA) collisions set bits MnD in MOB-DATA COLLISION register 31 ($1F) when a MOB and non-background display data from character/bitmap modes coincide; transparent data does not cause collisions. The 0-1 multi-color bit pair can be excluded from causing MOB-DATA collisions for background purposes. MOB-DATA collisions can occur off-screen horizontally if display data is scrolled off-screen. Also explains collision interrupt latches: once the first bit in either collision register is set, the corresponding interrupt latch is set and won't be set again until the collision register is cleared to all zeros by a read.

  COLLISION DETECTION


    Two types of MOB collision (coincidence) are detected, MOB to MOB
  collision and MOB to display data collision:


    1) A collision between two MOBs occurs when non-transparent output data
       of two MOBs are coincident. Coincidence of MOB transparent areas
       will not generate a collision. When a collision occurs, the MOB bits
       (MnM) in the MOB-MOB COLLISION register 30 ($1E) will be set to "1"
       for both colliding MOBS. As a collision between two (or more) MOBs
       occurs, the MOB-MOB collision bit for each collided MOB will be set.
       The collision bits remain set until a read of the collision
       register, when all bits are automatically cleared. MOBs collisions
       are detected even if positioned off-screen.
    2) The second type of collision is a MOB-DATA collision between a MOB
       and foreground display data from the character or bit map modes. The
       MOB-DATA COLLISION register 31 ($1F) has a 'bit (MnD) for each MOB
       which is set to "1" when both the MOB and non-background display
       data are coincident. Again, the coincidence of only transparent data
       does not generate a collision. For special applications, the display
       data from the 0-1 multicolor bit pair also does not cause a
       collision. This feature permits their use as background display data
       without interfering with true MOB collisions. A MOB-DATA collision
       can occur off-screen in the horizontal direction if actual display
       data has been scrolled to an off-screen position (see scrolling).
       The MOB-DATA COLLISION register also automatically clears when read.






  444   APPENDIX N
~


    The collision interrupt latches are set whenever the first bit of
   either register is set to "1". Once any collision bit within a register
   is set high, subsequent collisions will not set the interrupt latch
   until that collision register has been cleared to all "0s" by a read.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "mob_priority_and_foreground_behavior" which expands on Which MOB pixels are considered non-transparent and how priorities affect visible pixels
- "mob_memory_access_and_pointers" which expands on Collision detection is independent of MOB pointer fetching and can detect off-screen collisions
