# MACHINE - Explains the typical monitor display when entering an MLM: example header showing B*, and register titles (PC SR AC XR YR SP). Describes meanings: B* (break), PC (next instruction address), SR (status register), AC/XR/YR (A/X/Y contents), SP (stack pointer example $01F8), and mentions IRQ as an extra monitor field stored in memory. Explains the period prompt as 'ready' for commands.

                                                                         :15:

Monitor Display
---------------

The moment you enter the MLM, you'll see a display that looks something like
this:

  B*
      PC  SR AC XR YR SP
  .; 0005 20 54 23 6A F8
  .

The cursor will be flashing to the right of the period on the bottom line.
The exact appearance of the screen information may vary according to the
particular monitor you are using.  Other material may be displayed--in
particular, a value called IRQ--which we will ignore for the time being.

The information you see may be interpreted as follows:

  B*--we have reached the MLM by means of a "break."  More about that later.

  PC--The value shown below this title is the contents of the program
  counter.  This indicates where the program "stopped."  In other words, if
  the value shown is address 0005, the program stopped at address 0004, since
  the PC is ready to continue at the following address.  The exact value
  (0004 versus 0005) may vary depending on the particular MLM.

  SR--The value shown below shows the status register, which tells us the
  results of recent tests and data operations.  We'd need to split apart the
  eight bits and look at them individually to establish all the information
  here; we will do this at a later time.

  AC, XR, and YR--The values shown below these three titles are the contents
  of our three data registers:  A, X, and Y.

  SP--The value shown below is that of the stack pointer, which indicates a
  temporary storage area that the program might use.  A value of F8, for
  example, tells us that the next item to be dropped into the stack would go
  to address $01F8 in memory.  More on this later.

The period is roughly the equivalent of the READY statement in BASIC.  It
indicates that the computer is ready to receive a command from you.

You will notice that the display printed by the monitor (called the register
display) shows the internal registers within the 650x chip.  Sometimes there
is another term of information, titled IRQ, in this display.  It doesn't
belong, since it does not represent a microprocessor register.  IRQ tells us
to what address the computer will go to if an interrupt occurs; this
information is stored in memory, not within the 650x.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "mlm_commands_reference" which expands on commands to use from the monitor (exit .X, display memory .M, run .G, etc.)
- "displaying_memory_and_format" which expands on how memory displays appear and what the hex bytes mean
