# Contents - Overview of PAC-MAN and how to implement it on the C64: maze game with ghosts and power pellets that turn ghosts blue temporarily; difficulty by changing speeds and duration; use multicolor character graphics for maze/pellets and sprites for PAC-MAN, ghosts and bonus character. Sprite reuse: with eight hardware sprites, reassign remaining sprites to represent multiple pellets by repositioning after top pellets displayed.

PAC-MAN 

The most popular arcade game in recent times 
is PAC-MAN. This is a maze type game in which 
the player controls PAC-MAN in his journey around 
the maze while being chased by computer con- 
trolled ghosts. If PAC-MAN is hit by one of the 
ghosts, he loses a life. On the other hand, if PAC- 
MAN manages to eat one of the power pellets on 
the playfield, for a short amount of time the ghosts 
will turn blue. During this period of time, PAC- 
MAN may eat his enemies for a greater score. 



Difficulty levels are created by changing the 
speed of all of the characters and changing the 
amount of time that PAC-MAN has in which to eat 
the ghosts. PAC-MAN must eat all of the pellets on 
the playfield in order to advance to the next difficul- 
ty level. 'Nice during each level of play a bonus 
character appears on the screen for a short period 
of time. If PAC-MAN can eat the bonus character, 
he gets bonus points. The bonus character is worth 
more points on the higher levels. 

If you were to program PAC-MAN on the Com- 
modore 64, you would probably use the multicolor 
character graphics mode for the maze and the 
pellets. PAC-MAN and the four ghosts would be 
sprites. The bonus character could also be a sprite. 
At this point, you would have two sprites to spare 
because the Commodore 64 allows eight sprites, and 
only six have been allocated. These remaining two 
sprites could be used as the four power pallets by 
repositioning the sprites after the top 2 pellets have 
been displayed. This technique will be discussed in 
more detail in a later chapter. 



57 




---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sprite_collision_and_playfield_mapping" which expands on using collision registers to detect hits and pellet consumption
