# Contents - Gameplay description for 'Return of the Phoenix': player(s) control a wizard protecting a castle from a phoenix by shooting spells to prevent the phoenix from building a three-tier bridge. One wizard can fly freely; the other must stay near the bottom (different play styles). Nine difficulty levels; the program monitors player ability and adjusts difficulty. Starting at level 2, phoenix drop sleep spells that stun the player (~3 seconds). Higher levels increase phoenix speed and firing rate, and may increase wizard speed.

would like to play and pressing the fire button, you 
will initiate game play in that mode. Since the two 
players (high wizard and low wizard) do not have 
exactly the same capabilities, you may choose which 
of the two players you would like to control. 

Game Play 

In Return of the Phoenix, you will be playing 



the character of a wizard protecting a castle from 
the magical phoenix. You are able to stun the 
phoenix with spells shot from your staff. The goal 
is to prevent the phoenix from building a bridge in 
the sky. They will try to get to the bottom of the 
screen, pick up an energy spell, and bring it to the 
top of the screen, where a section will be added to 
the bridge. Game play will continue until the three 
tier bridge is completed. At this point, both you and 
the phoenix will have a score. If your score is higher 
than theirs, you win. 

One of the wizards can fly around the screen 
and go virtually anywhere that a phoenix can. The 
other wizard must stay near the bottom of the 
screen. This gives each of the wizards unique play- 
ing characteristics. Which one that you care to play 
is very much a matter of personal preference. 

There are nine levels of difficulty in Return of 
the Phoenix. The skill level that you are currently 
playing is shown at the top of the screen in the 
center. As you are playing, the program constantly 
monitors your playing ability and modifies the skill 
level accordingly. If the program feels that you are 
playing very well, it will increase the level of dif- 
ficulty. On the other hand, if you are playing poor- 
ly, the skill level will be decreased. The skill level 
can only be decreased if you are above level 4. 
Starting at level 2, the phoenix will start dropping 
sleep spells on the wizards. If you are hit, you will 
be unable to move for about three seconds. At the 
higher levels, the phoenix will shoot more often and 
move faster and at some levels, the wizards will 
move faster also. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "phoenix_scoring_overview" which expands on how phoenix scoring is computed over time
- "difficulty_levels_and_self_adjusting_system" which expands on self-adjusting difficulty (SAD) described later
