# Contents - TV display considerations: single isolated pixels of a color on a line may not be visible due to TV electron gun response time; use at least two adjacent pixels of same color for reliability. Pixel aspect is rectangular (not square); take 4/3 aspect ratio into account when drawing geometric shapes. Multicolor pixels are double-wide; care required for shapes. Sprite forms align with background grids for previewing.

Fig. 9-3. A grid showing character spaces. 



50 



pixel of a color on a line to guarantee that the pixel 
can be seen on the television. Television sets were 
not designed to be able to display drastic color 
changes on adjacent pixels. Depending on your color 
choices, a single pixel in an area of the screen may 
not be seen. This is due to the time that it takes 
the TV to turn on and off the appropriate electron 
guns that brighten a pixel. If the TV does not have 
enough time to adjust the guns, the pixel will have 
just started to light when the beams are changed 
for the next pixel. On the other hand, if you have 
2 or more adjacent pixels on a line of the same col- 
or, there will be enough time for the beams to be 
readjusted and the pixels displayed. 

The form in Fig. 9-1 is the form to use if you 
are going to be using the standard bitmapped 
graphics mode. You will notice t each pixel is rec- 
tangular in shape, rather then sq re as might have 
been expected. Thus, care must taken when at- 
tempting to draw geometric patterns on the screen. 
Since the pixels are rectangular, the normal equa- 
tions for generating geometric shapes do not hold 
true. However, if you take into account the 4/3 
aspect ratio of the pixels, any shape can be drawn 
properly. 

The form in Fig. 9-2 is to be used if you are go- 
ing to be using one of the multicolor modes for your 
graphics. You will notice that each pixel on this form 
is twice as wide as the pixels on the form 9-1. This 
is because it takes two bits to represent the four col- 
ors available to each block in the multicolor mode, 
as opposed to the one bit that is needed to deter- 
mine whether the foreground or background color 
will be used in the standard color mode. Once again, 
the pixels are not square, and care must be taken 
when you are creating shapes. 

The form in Fig. 9-3 is generally used to repre- 
sent the screen in the character graphics mode. It 
also can be used as an overlay to represent one of 
the color memory areas in the bitmapped graphics 
mode. 

The forms in Fig. 9-4 through 9-7 can be used 
as design aids when you are creating sprites. There 
are four different sizes available. The different sizes 
correspond to the sprite X and Y multiplier options. 
If you decide to use one of the e-panded sprites, 




Fig. 9-4. A grid for an unexpanded sprite. 

be sure to modify your program to change the 
SPRXSZ and SPRYSZ registers to the size option 
that you desire. The size of the grid on the sprite 
form is identical to the grid on the other graphics 
forms. This allows the sprites that you create to be 
placed on top of your background graphics forms 
to see how the entire screen will look. 

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "graphics_grid_figures" which expands on use appropriate form for chosen mode to account for pixel aspect
