# C64 PRG Chapter 1 - How to Crunch BASIC Programs

  26   BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES
~


  programs to provide clarity, you actually don't need any spaces in your
  program and will save space if you eliminate them.

  USING GOSUB ROUTINES

  If you use a particular line or instruction over and over, it might be
  wise to GOSUB to the line from several places in your program, rather
  than write the whole line or instruction every time you use it.

  USING TAB AND SPC

    Instead of PRINTing several cursor commands to position a character
  on the screen, it is often more economical to use the TAB and SPC in-
  structions to position words or characters on the screen.





























					       BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES   27
~~










                                                 CHAPTER 2




                                            BASIC LANGUAGE
                                                VOCABULARY



                           o Introduction
                           o BASIC Keywords, Abbreviations,
                             and Function Types
                           o Description of BASIC Keywords
                             (Alphabetical)
                           o The Commodore 64 Keyboard and
                             Features
                           o Screen Editor


















~


  INTRODUCTION

  This chapter explains CBM BASIC Language keywords. First we give you an
  easy to read list of keywords, their abbreviations and what each letter
  looks like on the screen. Then we explain how the syntax and operation of
  each keyword works in detail, and examples are shown to give you an idea
  as to how to use them in your programs.
    As a convenience, Commodore 64 BASIC allows you to abbreviate most
  keywords. Abbreviations are entered by typing enough letters of the
  keyword to distinguish it from all other keywords, with the last letter
  or graphics entered holding down the <SHIFT> key.
    Abbreviations do NOT save any memory when they're used in programs,
  because all keywords are reduced to single-character "tokens" by the
  BASIC Interpreter. When a program containing abbreviations is listed, all
  keywords appear in their fully spelled form. You can use abbreviations to
  put more statements onto a program line even if they won't fit onto the
  80-character logical screen line. The Screen Editor works on an 80-
  character line. This means that if you use abbreviations on any line that
  goes over 80 characters, you will NOT be able to edit that line when
  LISTed. Instead, what you'll have to do is (1) retype the entire line
  including all abbreviations, or (2) break the single line of code into
  two lines, each with its own line number, etc.
    A complete list of keywords, abbreviations, and their appearance on the
  screen is presented in Table 2-1. They are followed by an alphabetical
  description of all the statements, commands, and functions available on
  your Commodore 64.
    This chapter also explains the BASIC functions built into the BASIC
  Language Interpreter. Built-in functions can be used in direct mode
  statements or in any program, without having to define the function
  further. This is NOT the case with user-defined functions. The results of
  built-in BASIC functions can be used as immediate output or they can be
  assigned to a variable name of an appropriate type. There are two types
  of BASIC functions:

    1) NUMERIC
    2) STRING

    Arguments of built-in functions are always enclosed in parentheses ().
  The parentheses always come directly after the function keyword and NO
  SPACES between the last letter of the keyword and the left parenthesis (.



