# C64 PRG Chapter 1 - Variables: Integer, Floating-Point, String

  6   BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES
~


  (that is, any character spaces NOT taken up by the line number and other
  required parts of the statement).
    A string constant can contain blanks, letters, numbers, punctuation
  and color or cursor control characters in any combination. You can even
  put commas between numbers. The only character which cannot be included
  in a string is the double quote mark ("). This is because the double
  quote mark is used to define the beginning and end of the string.
  A string can also have a null value-which means that it can contain no
  character data. You can leave the ending quote mark off of a string if
  it's the last item on a line or if it's followed by a colon (:). Some
  examples of string constants are:

               ""         ( a null string)
               "HELLO"
               "$25,000.00"
               "NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES"

  +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
  |  NOTE: Us CHR$(34) to include quotes (") in strings.                  |
  +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

  INTEGER, FLOATING-POINT AND STRING VARIABLES

    Variables are names that represent data values used in your BASIC
  statements. The value represented by a variable can be assigned by
  setting it equal to a constant, or it can be the result of calculations
  in the program. Variable data, like constants, can be integers, floating-
  point numbers, or strings. If you refer to a variable name in a program
  before a value has been assigned, the BASIC Interpreter will auto-
  matically create the variable with a value of zero if it's an integer or
  floating-point number. Or it will create a variable with a null value if
  you're using strings.
    Variable names can be any length but only the first two characters are
  considered significant in CBM BASIC. This means that all names used for
  variables must NOT have the same first two characters. Variable names may
  NOT be the same as BASIC keywords and they may NOT contain keywords in
  the middle of variable names. Keywords include all BASIC commands, state-
  ments, function names and logical operator names. If you accidentally use
  a keyword in the middle of a variable name, the BASIC error message
  ?SYNTAX ERROR will show up on your screen.
    The characters used to form variable names are the alphabet and the
  numbers 0-9. The first character of the name must be a letter. Data

                                                BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES   7
~


  type declaration characters (%) and ($) can be used as the last char-
  acter of the name. The percent sign declares the variable to be an
  integer and the dollar sign ($) declares a string variable. If no type
  declaration character is used the Interpreter will assume that the vari-
  able is a floating-point. Some examples of variable names, value as-
  signments and data types are:

            A$="GROSS SALES"        (string variable)
            MTH$="JAN"+A$           (string variable)
            K%=5                    (integer variable)
            CNT%=CNT%+1             (integer variable)
            FP=12.5                 (floating-point variable)
            SUM=FP*CNT%             (floating-point variable)


  INTEGER, FLOATING-POINT AND STRING ARRAYS

    An array is a table (or list) of associated data items referred to by
  a single variable name. In other words, an array is a sequence of related
  variables. A table of numbers can be seen as an array, for example.
  The individual numbers within the table become "elements" of the array.
    Arrays are a useful shorthand way of describing a large number of
  related variables. Take a table of numbers for instance. Let's say that
  the table has 10 rows of numbers with 20 numbers in each row. That makes
  total of 200 numbers in the table. Without a single array name to call
  on you would have to assign a unique name to each value in the table. But
  because you can use arrays you only need one name for the array and all
  the elements in the array are identified by their individual locations
  within the array.
    Array names can be integers, floating-points or string data types and
  all elements in the array have the same data type as the array name.
  Arrays can have a single dimension (as in a simple list) or they can have
  multiple dimensions (imagine a grid marked in rows and columns or a
  Rubik's Cube(R)). Each element of an array is uniquely identified and re-
  ferred to by a subscript (or index variable) following the array name,
  enclosed within parentheses ( ).
    The maximum number of dimensions an array can have in theory is 255
  and the number of elements in each dimension is limited to 32767. But
  for practical purposes array sizes are limited by the memory space
  available to hold their data and/or the 80 character logical screen line.
  If an array has only one dimension and its subscript value will never


  8   BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES
~


  exceed 1 0 (1 I items: 0 thru 1 0) then the array will be created by the
  Interpreter and filled with zeros (or nulls if string type) the first
  time any element of the array is referred to, otherwise the BASIC DIM
  statement must be used to define the shape and size of the array. The
  amount of memory required to store an array can be determined as follows:

                5 bytes for the array name
              + 2 bytes for each dimension of the array
              + 2 bytes per element for integers
           OR + 5 bytes per element for floating-point
           OR + 3 bytes per  element for strings
          AND + 1 byte per character in each string element

    Subscripts can be integer constants, variables, or an arithmetic ex-
  pression which gives an integer result. Separate subscripts, with com-
  mas between them, are required for each dimension of an array. Sub-
  scripts can have values from zero up to the number of elements in the
  respective dimensions of the array. Values outside that range will cause
  the BASIC error message ?BAD SUBSCRIPT. Some examples of array names,
  value assignments and data types are:

        A$(0)="GROSS SALES"     (string array)
        MTH$(K%)="JAN"          (string array)
        G2%(X)=5                (integer array)
        CNT%(G2%(X))=CNT%(1)-2  (integer array)
        FP(12*K%)=24.8          (floating-point array)
        SUM(CNT%(1))=FP^K%      (floating-point array)

     A(5)=0     (sets the 5th element in the 1 dimensional
                 array called "A" equal to 0)

     B(5,6)=0   (sets the element in row position 5 and column position 6
                 in the 2 dimensional array called "B" equal to 0)

     C(1,2,3)=0 (sets the element in row position 1, column position 2,
                 and depth position 3 in the 3 dimensional array called
                 "C" equal to 0)

  EXPRESSIONS AND OPERATORS

    Expressions are formed using constants, variables and/or arrays. An
  expression can be a single constant, simple variable, or an array vari-

                                                BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES   9
~


  able of any type. It can also be a combination of constants and variables
  with arithmetic, relational or logical operators designed to produce a
  ingle value. How operators work is explained below. Expressions can be
  separated into two classes:

    1) ARITHMETIC
    2) STRING

    Expressions are normally thought of as having two or more data items
  called operands. Each operand is separated by a single operator to
  produce the desired result. This is usually done by assigning the value
  of the expression to a variable name. All of the examples of constants
  and variables that you've seen so for, were also examples of expressions.
    An operator is a special symbol the BASIC Interpreter in your Commodore
  64 recognizes as representing an operation to be performed on the
  variables or constant data. One or more operators, combined with one or
  more variables and/or constants form an expression. Arithmetic,
  relational and logical operators are recognized by Commodore 64 BASIC.

  ARITHMETIC EXPRESSIONS

    Arithmetic expressions, when solved, will give an integer or floating-
  point value. The arithmetic operators (+, -, *, /, ^) are used to perform
  addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and exponentiation opera-
  tions respectively.

  ARITHMETIC OPERATIONS

    An arithmetic operator defines an arithmetic operation which is per-
  formed on the two operands on either side of the operator. Arithmetic
  operations are performed using floating-point numbers. Integers are
  converted to floating-point numbers before an arithmetic operation is
  performed. The result is converted back to an integer if it is assigned
  to an integer variable name.

    ADDITION (+): The plus sign (+) specifies that the operand on the
  right is added to the operand on the left.






