# C64 PRG Chapter 1 - INPUT Statement, GET Statement

  22   BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES
~


    The Commodore 64 has a keyboard buffer that holds up to 10 characters.
  This means that if the computer is busy doing some operation and it's
  not reading the keyboard, you can still type in up to 10 characters,
  which will be used as soon as the Commodore 64 finishes what it was
  doing. To demonstrate this, type in this program on your Commodore 64:

    NEW
    10 TI$="000000"
    20 IF TI$ < "000015" THEN 20

  Now type RUN, hit <RETURN>  and while the program is RUNning type in the
  word HELLO.
    Notice that nothing happened for about IS seconds when the program
  started. Only then did the message HELLO appear on the screen.
    Imagine standing in line for a movie. The first person in the line is
  the first to get a ticket and leave the line. The last person in line is
  last for a ticket. The GET statement acts like a ticket taker. First it
  looks to see if there are any characters "in line." In other words have
  any keys been typed. If the answer is yes then that character gets placed
  in the appropriate variable. If no key was pressed then an empty value is
  assigned to a variable,
    At this point it's important to note that if you try to put more than
  10 characters into the buffer at one time, all those over the 10th
  character will be lost.
    Since the GET statement will keep going even when no character is
  typed, it is often necessary to put the GET statement into a loop so that
  it will have to wait until someone hits a key or until a character is
  received through your program.
    Below is the recommended form for the GET statement. Type NEW to erase
  your previous program.

    10 GET A$: IF A$ ="" THEN 10

  Notice that there is NO SPACE between the quote marks("") on this line.
  This indicates an empty value and sends the program back to the GET
  statement in a continuous loop until someone hits a key on the computer.
  Once a key is hit the program will continue with the line following line
  10. Add this line to your program:

    100 PRINT A$;: GOTO 10



					       BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES   23
~


  Now RUN the program. Notice that no cursor appears on the screen, but
  any character you type will be printed in the screen. This 2-line program
  can be turned into part of a screen editor program as shown below.
    There are many things you can do with a screen editor. You can have
  a flashing cursor. You can keep certain keys like <CLR/HOME> from
  accidentally erasing the whole screen. You might even want to be able to
  use your function keys to represent whole words or phrases. And speaking
  of function keys, the following program lines give each function key a
  special purpose. Remember this is only the beginning of a program that
  you can customize for your needs.

    20 IF A$ = CHR$(133) THEN POKE 53280,8: GOTO 10
    30 IF A$ = CHR$(134) THEN POKE 53281,4: GOTO 10
    40 IF A$ = CHR$(135) THEN A$="DEAR SIR:"+CHR$(13)
    50 IF A$ = CHR$(136) THEN A$="SINCERELY,"+CHR$(13)

    The CHR$ numbers in parentheses come from the CHR$ code chart in
  Appendix C. The chart lists a different number for each character. The
  four function keys are set up to perform the tasks represented by the
  instructions that follow the word THEN in each line. By changing the
  CHR$ number inside each set of parentheses you can designate different
  keys. Different instructions would be performed if you changed the
  information after the THEN statement.

  HOW TO CRUNCH BASIC PROGRAMS

  You can pack more instructions - and power - into your BASIC programs by
  making each program as short as possible. This process of shortening
  programs is called "crunching."
    Crunching programs lets you squeeze the maximum possible number of
  instructions into your program. It also helps you reduce the size of
  programs which might not otherwise run in a given size; and if you're
  writing a program which requires the input of data such as inventory
  items, numbers or text, a short program will leave more memory space free
  to hold data.

  ABBREVIATING KEYWORDS

    A list of keyword abbreviations is given in Appendix A. This is helpful
  when you program because you can actually crowd more information on each
  line using abbreviations. The most frequently used abbreviation is


  24   BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES
~


  the question mark (?) which is the BASIC abbreviation for the PRINT
  command. However, if you LIST a program that has abbreviations, the
  Commodore 64 will automatically print out the listing with the full-
  length keywords. If any program line exceeds 80 characters (2 lines on
  the screen) with the keywords unabbreviated, and you want to change it,
  you will have to re-enter that line with the abbreviations before saving
  the program. SAVEing a program incorporates the keywords without
  inflating any lines because BASIC keywords are tokenized by the Commodore
  64. Usually, abbreviations are added after a program is written and it
  isn't going to be LISTed any more before SAVEing.

  SHORTENING PROGRAM LINE NUMBERS

    Most programmers start their programs at line 100 and number each fine
  at intervals of 10 (i.e., 100, 110, 120). This allows extra lines of
  instruction to be added (111, 112, etc.) as the program is developed.
  One means of crunching the program after it is completed is to change
  the fine numbers to the lowest numbers possible (i.e., 1, 2, 3) because
  longer line numbers take more memory than shorter numbers when referenced
  by GOTO and GOSUB statements. For instance, the number 100 uses 3 bytes
  of memory (one for each number) while the number I uses only 1 byte.

  PUTTING MULTIPLE INSTRUCTIONS ON EACH LINE

    You can put more than one instruction on each numbered line in your
  program by separating them by a colon. The only limitation is that all
  the instructions on each line, including colons, should not exceed the
  standard 80-character line length. Here is an example of two programs,
  before and after crunching:

  BEFORE CRUNCHING:              AFTER CRUNCHING:

  10 PRINT"HELLO...";            10 PRINT "HELLO...";:FORT=1TO500:NEXT:
  20 FOR T=1 TO 500: NEXT           PRINT"HELLO, AGAIN...":GOTO10
  30 PRINT"HELLO, AGAIN..."
  40 GOTO 10

  REMOVING REM STATEMENTS

    REM statements are helpful in reminding yourself-or showing other
  programmers - what a particular section of a program is doing. However,
  when the program is completed and ready to use, you probably

					       BASIC PROGRAMMING RULES   25
~


  won't need those REM statements anymore and you can save quite a bit of
  space by removing the REM statements. If you plan to revise or study the
  program structure in the future, it's a good idea to keep a copy on file
  with the REM statements intact.

  USING VARIABLES

    If a number, word or sentence is used repeatedly in your program it's
  usually best to define those long words or numbers with a one or two
  letter variable. Numbers can be defined as single letters. Words and
  sentences can be defined as string variables using a letter and dollar
  sign. Here's one example:

  BEFORE CRUNCHING:                 AFTER CRUNCHING:

  10 POKE 54296,15                  10 V=54296:F=54273
  20 POKE 54276,33                  20 POKEV,15:POKE54276,33
  30 POKE 54273,10                  30 POKEF,10:POKEF,40:POKEF,70
  40 POKE 54273,40                  40 POKEV,0
  50 POKE 54273,70
  60 POKE 54296,0

  USING READ AND DATA STATEMENTS

    Large amounts of data can be typed in as one piece of data at a time,
  over and over again ... or you can print the instructional part of the
  program ONCE and print all the data to be handled in a long running list
  called the DATA statement. This is especially good for crowding large
  lists of numbers into a program.

  USING ARRAYS AND MATRICES

  Arrays and matrices are similar to DATA statements in that long amounts
  of data can be handled as a list, with the data handling portion of the
  program drawing from that list, in sequence. Arrays differ in that the
  list can be multi-dimensional

  ELIMINATING SPACES

    One of the easiest ways to reduce the size of your program is to
  eliminate all the spaces. Although we often include spaces in sample


