# COMMODORE 64 - Programmable characters: how to point VIC-II to RAM character set by changing character memory pointer in register $D018. Important notes: when using RAM character set, original Commodore characters are unavailable unless copied into RAM (all-or-nothing), and character RAM consumes memory from BASIC program space (approx 38K available to BASIC). Warning to protect character RAM from being overwritten by BASIC; advice about safe starting pages (do not use locations 0 or 2048 because system uses page 0 and BASIC starts at 2048); mentions there are six other safe 2K starting positions and that best place to put character set for BASIC is described next (continues beyond provided excerpt).

  PROGRAMMABLE CHARACTERS

    Since the characters are stored in ROM, it would seem that there is no
  way to change them for customizing characters. However, the memory
  location that tells the VIC-II chip where to find the characters is a
  programmable register which can be changed to point to many sections of
  memory. By changing the character memory pointer to point to RAM, the
  character set may be programmed for any need.
    If you want your character set to be located in RAM, there are a few
  VERY IMPORTANT things to take into account when you decide to actually
  program your own character sets. In addition, there are two other
  important points you must know to create your own special characters:

    1) It is an all or nothing process. Generally, if you use your own
       character set by telling the VIC-II chip to get the character
       information from the area you have prepared in RAM, the standard
     Commodore 64 characters are unavailable to you. To solve this, you
     must copy any letters, numbers, or standard Commodore 64 graphics you
     intend to use into your own character memory in RAM. You can pick and
     choose, take only the ones you want, and don't even have to keep them
     in order!


  108   PROGRAMMING GRAPHICS
~


    2) Your character set takes memory space away from your BASIC program.
       Of course, with 38K available for a BASIC program, most applications
       won't have problems.


  +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | WARNING: You must be careful to protect the character set from being  |
  | overwritten by your BASIC program, which also uses the RAM.           |
  +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "switching_io_and_character_rom_access" which expands on copying ROM images into RAM requires switching I/O and disabling interrupts
- "screen_memory_and_register_d018" which expands on how to set character memory pointer bits in $D018
