# byRiclianll - Section 1.1: Notes about the 46 BASIC disk utility programs included with the book — copyright restrictions, recommended precautions, inclusion of machine-language source listings (.PAL), and testing disclaimers.

1 .1  A  Brief  Word  About  the  Programs 

This  book  contains  listings  for  46  ready-to-use  programs  written  in  BASIC.  These  pro- 
grams are  copyrighted.  They  may  NOT  be  used  commercially,  in  whole  or  in  part,  period. 
Since  many  of  the  programs  are  long,  typing  them  all  in  would  be  a  time  consuming, 
tedious  task.  Feel  free  to  share  your  typing  efforts  with  a  friend  who  has  also  purchased 
a  copy  of  this  book.  In  return,  we  simply  ask  that  you  do  not  share  a  program  with  some- 
one who  does  not  own  a  legitimate  copy  of  this  book. 


11 


The  programs  in  this  book  are  disk  utiUties.  They  do  not  use  flashy  graphics  or  sound. 
Rather,  they  are  extremely  powerful  tools.  Remember,  any  tool  can  be  dangerous  if  it 
is  used  improperly.  Be  sure  that  you  know  what  you  are  doing  before  you  use  a  given 
program.  Always  experiment  with  a  program  on  a  test  diskette  before  you  actually  use 
it  on  one  that  contains  valuable  programs  or  data.  Practice  makes  perfect. 

Each  program  was  individually  tested  on  a  variety  of  1541  disk  drives  having  a  wide 
range  of  serial  numbers.  Moreover,  each  program  always  worked  perfectly.  Unfortunately, 
it  is  impossible  to  guarantee  that  a  particular  program  will  work  with  your  model.  If 
a  given  program  does  not  seem  to  work  properly,  check  your  typing  carefully.  Any  er- 
rors, especially  in  the  DATA  statements  which  contain  a  machine  language  program,  will 
produce  problems. 

As  a  courtesy  to  the  more  advanced  programmer,  we  have  also  included  the  source  listings 
for  each  machine  language  routine.  A  source  listing  immediately  follows  a  related  BASIC 
program  listing  and  has  a  file  name  ending  in  ".PAL".  It  is  for  use  with  the  PAL  assembler. 
Note:  If  you  are  using  a  different  assembler,  you  may  have  to  make  some  minor  changes. 

The  programs  in  this  book  were  designed  to  be  not  only  useful  and  beneficial,  but  in- 
structive as  well.  Many  of  them  illustrate  the  "state  of  the  art"  in  the  use  of  Commodore's 
direct-access  disk  commands.  Enjoy! 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "typing_conventions_and_lister" which expands on how programs were prepared for printing
