# MACHINE - Questions/projects related to interrupts and wedges: ideas to redirect IRQ to display zero page contents, discussion prompt about using stack for parameter passing to subroutines, ideas for scrolling listings (SYS, wedge, or interrupt?), checking stack contents to see SYS return address.

Questions and Projects
----------------------

If you redirect the interrupt vector to your own machine language program,
you can copy all of zero page to the screen.  Use indexing; start X at zero;
and walk through the whole of zero page, loading the memory contents and
storing (indexed again, of course) to the screen.  Don't forget to connect up
your code to the regular interrupt entry address.

You'll get a fascinating screen.  There will be timers going, and as you type
on the keyboard you'll see various inner values changing around.  Enjoy the
view.

                                                                        :128:

It's sometimes suggested that a good way to pass information to a subroutine
is to push the information onto the stack and call the subroutine.  The
subroutine can pull the information from the stack.  What's wrong with this
suggestion?

The above suggestion can be implemented, but it takes a lot of careful stack
work.  You might like to work through the logic needed to do this.

There are some utility programs which, when placed in the computer, allow a
listing to be "scrolled."  In other words, if the screen shows BASIC lines
250 to 460, the user can take the cursor to the bottom of the screen and
continue to press the cursor-down key.  New BASIC lines (following 460) will
then appear.  This is not an easy thing to code, but here's the question:  do
you think that this feature is done with a SYS command, a wedge, or an
interrupt technique?  Why?

A SYS command from BASIC is like a subroutine call; so it must place an
address on the stack to allow RTS to return to BASIC.  Take a look at the
stack and see if you can determine what address is used to return to BASIC on
your machine.

                                                                        :129:
                                                                        :130:
                                                                        :131:



                                                          Chapter 8

                                                            Timing,

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "things_you_have_learned_interrupts_stack_usr_sys" which expands on Suggested projects relate to learned items
