# byRiclianll - Advice for recovering a physically damaged diskette (section 8.6): common problems include warped jacket or contamination. Carefully open the protective jacket with plastic gloves, remove the plastic disk, wash (use photographer's wetting agent to avoid residue) and air-dry if gummy, and insert the plastic disk into a new jacket (note which side faces up; handle by edges/hub). If a reusable jacket from head-cleaners is available it may be used. After re-jacketing, attempt to initialize the disk—if successful, immediately make a backup.

8.6  Recovering  a  Physicaiiy  Damaged  Disl<ette 

If  your  diskette  has  sustained  physical  damage  all  is  not  lost.  The  most  common  forms 
of  physical  damage  are  a  warped  jacket  or  environmental  contamination.  In  either  case, 
the  solution  is  to  don  a  pair  of  plastic  gloves,  carefully  slit  open  the  protective  jacket, 
remove  the  plastic  disk,  wash  it  if  necessary,  and  insert  it  into  another  jacket.  Obtain- 
ing a  new  jacket  may  mean  destroying  a  perfectly  good  diskette,  though.  NOTE:  Some 
brands  of  head  cleaners  come  with  a  reusable  jacket  that  is  just  right  for  this  job. 

Be  sure  to  keep  your  fingers  off  the  recording  surface  at  all  times!  Handle  the  plastic 
disk  only  by  the  edges  or  the  central  hub  ring.  Also  make  a  mental  note  as  to  which 
side  faces  up.  (The  reinforcing  ring  is  usually  affixed  to  this  side.) 

If  the  plastic  disk  is  gummy,  you  will  want  to  wash  it  carefully.  Use  a  small  amount 
of  photographer's  wetting  agent  to  keep  the  water  from  leaving  a  residue.  Allow  the 
plastic  disk  to  air  dry. 

Once  you  have  inserted  the  plastic  disk  inside  a  new  jacket,  attempt  to  initialize  it.  If 
you  cannot  initialize  it,  try  turning  the  diskette  over.  You  may  have  the  wrong  side  up. 

If  the  diskette  can  be  initialized,  make  a  backup  NOW! 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "recovering_entire_diskette" which expands on After physically recovering the disk, run 1541 BACKUP and VALIDATE as described in the entire-diskette recovery procedure
