# byRiclianll - Recovering from a full NEW (section 8.9): if you interrupt a full FORMAT in progress, immediately open the drive and try to stop the reformat (one track lost per stepper motor click). Attempt to make a backup with the 1541 BACKUP program; because formatting goes from outer tracks inward, if you stopped in time track 18 may still be intact and many files recoverable. Run VALIDATE A DISKETTE to assess damage; often many files can be recovered. Advice includes remaining calm and acting quickly to minimize track loss.

8.9  Recovering  from  a  Full  IMew 

If  you  are  reading  this  section  in  desperation,  relax.  It  is  already  too  late.  However, 
if  it  dawns  on  you  in  the  future  that  you  are  holding  a  blank  diskette  in  your  hand  while 
the  master  that  you  were  going  to  backup  is  being  reformatted,  don't  PANIC!  Attempt 
to  regain  your  composure  and  pop  the  drive  door  open.  At  this  point  you  don't  care 
what  the  1541  User's  Manual  says  about  opening  the  drive  door  when  the  red  activity 
indicator  is  on.  You  are  losing  one  full  track  every  time  you  hear  the  stepper  motor  click. 

Next  attempt  to  make  a  backup  copy  of  the  diskette  using  the  1541  BACKUP  program 
listed  on  page  162.  (Please,  try  to  remember  which  diskette  you  want  to  format  this 
time.)  Recall  that  formatting  works  from  the  outermost  track  (track  1)  to  the  innermost 


179 


track  (track  35).  If  you  threw  the  door  in  time  track  18  will  still  be  intact  and  so  will 
most  of  your  files.  The  DOS  works  outwards  from  track  18  when  writing  to  a  diskette. 
The  outermost  tracks  were  probably  never  in  use. 

Now  load  and  run  the  VALIDATE  A  DISKETTE  program  to  assess  the  damage.  Often- 
times all  files  are  recovered. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "recovering_entire_diskette" which expands on After stopping a format, use 1541 BACKUP and VALIDATE as described in entire-diskette recovery
