# byRiclianll - Steps for recovering an entire diskette that cannot be initialized (section 8.5): run the 1541 BACKUP program (chapter 7) to make a backup; if the directory appears normal, VALIDATE the backup; if VALIDATE fails, inspect and copy intact files to a new disk. If the backup's directory cannot be fully listed (hard error on track 18 during backup), run DISPLAY A CHAIN on the backup to locate the uncopyable sector, then use EDIT TRACK & SECTOR to relink the directory around the bad sector (consult the table in section 8.1 to determine the normally following sector). Note that relinking may lose up to eight files; then inspect and copy remaining files to a new diskette.

8.5  Recovering  an  Entire  Diskette 


NOTE:  This  section  applies  only  to  a  diskette  that  cannot  be  initialized. 

Chapter  7  contains  a  program  called  1541  BACKUP  (section  7.15).  Run  this  program 
to  make  a  backup  of  your  blown  diskette.  After  you  have  made  a  backup,  load  and  list 
the  directory.  If  the  directory  appears  normal,  you  will  want  to  validate  the  backup. 
If  the  validate  command  fails,  inspect  and  copy  each  intact  file  to  a  new  diskette.  Some 
files  may  be  lost  in  the  process. 

If  the  directory  cannot  be  displayed  in  its  entirety,  a  hard  error  was  encountered  on 
track  18  during  the  backup  operation.  The  sector  containing  the  hard  error  could  not 
be  copied.  As  a  result,  the  directory  on  the  backup  is  corrupt.  Load  and  run  DISPLAY 
A  CHAIN  on  the  backup.  Attempt  to  follow  the  chain  starting  at  track  18,  sector  1. 
The  display  will  indicate  the  location  of  the  uncopyable  sector  by  aborting.  Run  EDIT 
TRACK  &  SECTOR  on  the  backup  to  relink  the  directory  around  this  sector.  Refer 
to  the  table  in  section  8.1  to  determine  which  sector  normally  follows  the  one  in  ques- 
tion. Keep  in  mind  that  eight  files  will  be  lost  by  this  action.  If  all  goes  well  you  should 
be  able  to  list  the  directory  now.  Inspect  and  copy  all  remaining  files  to  a  new  diskette. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "track18_directory_sector_table" which expands on Use directory/track/sector tables when reconstructing track 18, sector 1
- "recovering_physically_damaged_diskette" which expands on If diskette damage is physical, consider the physical recovery steps before attempting backup
