# 6502 Instruction Set - Detailed register descriptions: PC (16-bit), AC/A (accumulator 8-bit), X and Y index registers (8-bit), SR status register [NV-BDIZC], SP stack pointer (8-bit). Notes on common monitor display formats and register naming. Explanation of the accumulator as ALU primary register and how X and Y are used as index registers for effective addresses. Introduces the concept of effective address, loops, and table lookups.

                                   After (6501 specifics omitted):
                    MCS6502 Microcomputer Family Hardware Manual; Jannuary 1976.
                             MOS Technology, Inc., Norristown/PA, 1976.
          Registers
            PC .... program counter              (16 bit)
            AC .... accumulator                   (8 bit)
                                                                 6502 Instruction Set
             X .... X register                    (8 bit)
             Y .... Y register                    (8 bit)
             SR .... status register [NV-BDIZC]   (8 bit)
             SP .... stack pointer                (8 bit)
          Note: The status register (SR) is also known as the P register,
          the accumulator (AC) as just A, the stack pointer (SP) as S, and
          X and Y registers as XR and YR, respectively.
          Contemporary machine language monitors (here, Commodore PET) show
          them typically like,
              B*
                   PC IRQ SR AC XR YR SP
              .;  0401 E62E 32 04 5E 00 F8
              .
          ("IRQ" is not a register, but the interrupt request vector, see below.)
            The accumulator is the main rgister of the 6502. Its content
            is typically used by the arithmetic logic unit (ALU) for the
            first operand and results are deposited in the accumulator
            again. Thus its name, as results accumulate in this register.
            Most arithmetic and logical operations interact with this
            register.
            The X and Y registers are auxiliary registers. Like the
            accumulator, they can be loaded directly with values, both
            immediatedly (as literal constants) or from memory.
            Additionally, they can be incremented and decremented, and
            their contents may be transferred to and from the acuumulator.
            Their main purpose is the use as index registers, where their
            contents is added to a base memory location, before any values
            are either stored to or retrieved from the resulting address,
            which is known as the effective address. This is commonly used
            for loops and table lookups at a given index, hence the name.
            (See address modes, below.)
            The program counter keeps track of the memory location holding
            the current instruction code. Its contents is automatically
            stepped up as the program is executed and is modified by
            branch and jump operations. As it must be able to address the
            full 16-bit address range of 64K bytes, it's the only 16-bit
            register of the 6502.
            The stack pointer points to the current top of stack (or
            rather, to its bottom, as the stack grows top-down.) The
            processor stack is located on memory page #1 ($0100–$01FF), a
            256 bytes last-in-first-out (LIFO) stack, which enables
            subroutines and also serves as a quick intermediate storage.
            As a 8-bit register, the stack pointer holds just the low-byte
            of this address (the offset from $0100.)
            Be aware that this will just wrap around, in case that the
            stack underflows.
                                                          6502 Instruction Set
            The status register holds the status of the processor,
            consisting of flags reflecting results of previous operations,
            configuration flags, like disabeling (blocking) interrupts or
            setting up binary encoded decimal mode (BCD), and the carry
            flag, which enables multi-byte arithmetics.
          Status Register Flags (bit 7 to bit 0)

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "processor_stack_and_bytes_words" which expands on stack location and byte/word formats
- "address_modes_details" which expands on how X/Y influence addressing modes
