# - C64 RAM Map (Mapping The Commodore 64) - $030C-$030F: Register Storage Area used by BASIC SYS command to store 6510 registers (.A, .X, .Y, .P). Explains that SYS loads registers from these storage addresses before a ML routine and saves them back after RTS, allowing preentry register values and postroutine inspection. Gives example using Kernal PLOT (SYS 65520) with POKE into storage area to position cursor, and using SCREEN (SYS 65517) to get screen size.

$030C-$030F          Register Storage Area
                     
                     The BASIC SYS command uses this area to store 6510 internal
                     registers--the Accumulator (.A), the .X and .Y index registers, and
                     the status register, .P.
                     
                     Before every SYS command, each of the registers is loaded with the
                     value found in the corresponding storage address.  After the ML
                     program finished executing, and returns to BASIC with an RTS
                     instruction, the new value of each register is stored in the
                     appropriate storage address.  This is only true of SYS, not of the
                     similar USR command.
                     
                     This feature allows you to place the necessary preentry values into
                     the registers from BASIC before you SYS to a Kernal or BASIC ML
                     routine.  It also enables you to examine the resulting effect of the
                     routine on the registers, and to preserve the condition of the
                     registers on exit for subsequent SYS calls.
                     
                     An extremely practical application comes immediately to mind.
                     Although the 64's BASIC 2 has many commands for formatting printed
                     characters on the monitor screen (for example, TAB, SPC, PRINT A$,B),
                     there is none to adjust the vertical cursor position.
                     
                     There is a Kernal routine, PLOT (58634, $E50A), which will allow you
                     to position the cursor anywhere on the screen.  In order to use it,
                     you must first clear the carry flag (set it to 0), and then place the
                     desired horizontal column number in the .Y register and the vertical
                     row number in the .X register before entering the routine with a SYS
                     65520.  Using the register storage area, we can print the work HELLO
                     at row 10, column 5 with the following BASIC line:
                     
                         POKE 781,10:POKE 782,5:POKE 783,0:SYS 65520:PRINT "HELLO"
                     
                     You can also use these locations to help you take advantage of Kernal
                     routines that return information in the register.  For example, the
                     SCREEN routine (58629,$E505) returns the number of screen rows in the
                     .Y register, and the number of columns in the .X register.  Using this
                     routine, a BASIC program could be written to run on machines with
                     different screen formats (for example, the 64 and the VIC-20).  Just
                     PEEK(781) after a SYS 65517 to see how many screen columns the
                     computer display has.
                     

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "register_storage_addresses" which expands on specific storage addresses for .A, .X, .Y, .P
- "usradd_and_parameter_passing" which expands on passing parameters to/from USR and interaction with register storage
