# Contents - SCREEN MAKER utility (Listing C-20) for character graphics screens. Loads CLBACK1, CLSP1 and SLIB.O. Allows selection of any character in the character set and placement anywhere on the screen; shows current character and its color; controls: joystick to move cursor, FIRE to plot selected character, F1 increments character number, F3 decrements character number, F5 increments character color (writes to color RAM), F7 increments background color, L loads a file, S saves a file. Color information is saved with the character placement.

USING THE SCREEN MAKER UTILITY 

If you are going to use a character graphics 
mode, you will need some way to specify the place- 
ment of the character graphics on the screen. The 
SCREEN MAKER Listing C-20 in Appendix C will 
aid you in defining a screen of graphics.This pro- 
gram will load three machine language routines, 
CLBACK1 in Listing C-21, CLSP1 in Listing C-22, 
and SLIB.O in Listing C-18. This program will allow 
you to select any of the characters out of your 
character set, and place it in any position on the 
screen. This will allow you to see quickly how your 
screen will look. When you are finished, you will 
be able to save the screen to the disk. To run the 
program, type: 

LOAD"SCREEN-MAKE",8 
RUN 

Enter the filename to be used when loading or sav- 
ing a file to the disk when prompted. The follow- 
ing controls are used in this program: 

JOYSTICK Moves the cursor around the 

screen 



FIRE BUTTON Plots the selected character 



Fl 

F3 

F5 
F7 
L 
S 



on the screen 
Increments the current 
character number 
Decrements the current 
character number 
Increments the character color 
Increments the background color 
Loads a file from the disk 
Saves a file to the disk 



After you run the program, the screen will clear 
and the first character in the character set will be 
displayed in the upper left hand corner of the screen. 
The next character in the upper left hand corner 
of the screen shows the current character color. If 
this color is the same as the background color, the 
space will appear blank. 

Pressing the Fl key will select the next 
character from the character set. You will see the 
character in the upper left corner of the screen. By 
repeatedly pressing the Fl button, you can scan 
through your entire character set. Button F3 will 
select the previous character from the character set. 
By using these two buttons, you will be able to move 
forward or backward through the character set. 

The F5 key will increment the character color. 
This is the color that will be placed into the color 
RAM when the character number is placed in the 
screen RAM. Pressing the F7 key will increment 
the background color. This is useful when you wish 
to see what the screen would look like with different 
background colors. 

You may load a screen to be edited using the 
L command. When you are finished making 
changes, you should use the S command to save the 
screen back to the disk. When a screen is saved to 
the disk, the color information is saved to the disk 
along with the character placement information. 



56 




---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sprite_maker_utility" which expands on sprite utilities and complementary tools for backgrounds
