# Contents - When fine scroll reaches maximum, CPU must shift character-screen memory by one character and reset fine scroll. Advice: fast routines are necessary to avoid visual breaks; if moving the whole screen is too slow, prepare scrolled memory in an off-screen buffer and use TXBAS or GRABAS macro to point VIC to the prepared area once ready. Choose macro depending on current graphics mode.

vertical scrolling. By clearing bit 3 of the YSCRL 
register, when the vertical scroll is set to 3, half of 
the top row and half of the bottom row will be 
covered by the border. The VIC chip can be re- 
turned to the normal 25 row mode by setting bit 3 
of the YSCR L register. When the vertical scroll is 
set to 0, the top line will be entirely covered by the 
border. When the vertical scroll is set to 7, the bot- 
tom line of the screen will be entirely covered by 
the border. 

Once you have reached a maximum scroll value 
in the X or Y direction, you will have to shift each 
character on the screen in the direction of the scroll 
in order to continue scrolling. After moving all of 
the characters on the screen, you can reset the fine 



scrolling registers to their minimum value and con- 
tinue to use the hardware registers to scroll the 
screen. 

There are a number of things that must be 
taken into account when writing a scrolling program. 
In order for the screen to appear to be in continuous 
smooth motion, the routine that will shift each 
character must be extremely fast. Also, if you are 
using a number of different colors in color RAM, 
each character in color RAM must be moved in the 
direction of the scroll at the same time as the 
characters in screen memory. If you do not need to 
scroll the entire screen, your program can be much 
shorter and will run faster. If your program does not 
run fast enough, you will see breaks in your graphics 
where the characters that have been scrolled are ad- 
jacent to characters that have not yet been scrolled. 

If possible, your routine should be fast enough 
to reposition the entire screen in one screen update 
time (1/60 of a second). You can get by with a slower 
routine if you scroll your screen memory into a dif- 
ferent area of memory than the one that is current- 
ly being displayed. This must be completed before 
the fine scrolling register reaches its limit, so when 
the entire screen needs to be repositioned, it will 
be ready. Instead of repositioning the entire screen 
at that point, which would have to be done within 
1/60 of a second, all you need to do is to use the 
TXBAS or GRABAS macro to instruct the VIC chic 
to get the data from the area that has already been 
repositioned. The macro that you will use depend: 

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "graphics_memory_byte_organization_table" which expands on repositioning screen memory layout for scrolling
