# COMMODORE 64 - Explains copying or creating individual characters from ROM into RAM to replace unwanted ones. Example shows copying a reversed 'Z' into location of '>' via FOR I=0 TO 7:POKE 12784+I,255-PEEK(I+12496):NEXT. Notes that visual replacement doesn't change the logical character code behavior (the character still acts like its original code). Introduces creating custom characters using DATA and POKE sequences.

    Remember that we only took the first 64 characters. Something else will
  have to be done if you want one of the other characters.
    What if you wanted character number 154, a reversed Z? Well, you could
  make it yourself, by reversing a Z, or you could copy the set of reversed
  characters from the ROM, or just take the one character you want from ROM
  and replace one of the characters you have in RAM that you don't need.

    Suppose you decide that you won't need the > sign. Let's replace the
  > sign with the reversed Z. Type this:


    FOR I=0 TO 7:POKE 12784+I,255-PEEK(I+12496):NEXT

    Now type a > sign. It comes up as a reversed Z. No matter how many
  times you type the >, it comes out as a reversed Z. (This change is
  really an illusion. Though the > sign looks like a reversed Z, it still
  acts like a > in a program. Try something that needs a > sign. It will
  still work fine, only it will look strange.)
    A quick review: You can now copy characters from ROM into RAM. You can
  even pick and choose only the ones you want. There's only one step left
  in programmable characters (the best step!)... making your own
  characters.
    Remember how characters are stored in ROM? Each character is stored as
  a group of eight bytes. The bit patterns of the bytes directly control
  the character. If you arrange 8 bytes, one on top of another, and write
  out each byte as eight binary digits, it forms an eight by eight matrix,
  looking like the characters. When a bit is a one, there is a dot at that
  location. When a bit is a zero, there is a space at that location. When
  creating your own characters, you set up the same kind of table in
  memory. Type NEW and then type this program:

    10 FOR I=12448 TO 12455: READ A:POKE I,A:NEXT
    20 DATA 60, 66, 165, 129, 165, 153, 66, 60

                                                 PROGRAMMING GRAPHICS   111
~


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "creating_character_patterns_and_worksheet" which expands on creating characters with DATA statements and the 8-row encoding
