# COMMODORE 64 - Overview of the Commodore 64 serial bus: daisy-chain arrangement used to connect devices (e.g., VIC-1541 disk drive, VIC-1525 printer), supports up to 5 devices, and provides three operation roles (CONTROLLER, TALKER, LISTENER). Describes the C64 as the controller (and optionally talker/listener), explains device addressing on the bus (addresses 4–31), and the concepts of commanding devices to TALK or LISTEN to route data to an intended destination without collisions.

  THE SERIAL BUS

    The serial bus is a daisy chain arrangement designed to let the Com-
  modore 64 communicate with devices such as the VIC-1541 DISK DRIVE and
  the VIC-1525 GRAPHICS PRINTER. The advantage of the serial bus is that
  more than one device can be connected to the port. Up to 5 devices can be
  connected to the serial bus at one time.
    There are three types of operation over a serial bus-CONTROL, TALK, and
  LISTEN. A CONTROLLER device is one which controls operation of the serial
  bus. A TALKER transmits data onto the bus. A LISTENER receives data from
  the bus.
    The Commodore 64 is the controller of the bus. It also acts as a TALKER
  (when sending data to the printer, for example) and as a LISTENER (when
  loading a program from the disk drive, for example). Other devices may be
  either LISTENERS (the printer), TALKERS, or both (the disk drive). Only
  the Commodore 64 can act as the controller.
    All devices connected on the serial bus will receive all the data
  transmitted over the bus. To allow the Commodore 64 to route data to its
  intended destination, each device has a bus ADDRESS. By using this device
  address, the Commodore 64 can control access to the bus. Addresses on the
  serial bus range from 4 to 31.
    The Commodore 64 can COMMAND a particular device to TALK or LISTEN.
  When the Commodore 64 commands a device to TALK, the device will begin
  putting data onto the serial bus. When the Commodore 64 commands a device
  to LISTEN, the device addressed will get ready to receive data (from the
  Commodore 64 or from another device on the bus). Only one device can TALK
  on the bus at a time; otherwise, the data will collide and the system
  will crash in confusion. However, any number of devices can LISTEN at the
  same time to one TALKER.





  362   INPUT/OUTPUT GUIDE
~



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "serial_bus_common_addresses" which expands on common device addresses used on the serial bus
- "serial_bus_secondary_address_and_open_syntax" which expands on how to OPEN a connection and use secondary addresses for device setup
- "serial_bus_signal_lines_and_pinout" which expands on the physical serial I/O lines used and their pin mapping
