# - C64 I/O Map (Mapping The Commodore 64) - $D415-$D418 — Filter Controls: SID includes configurable low-pass, high-pass, and band-pass filters and can also filter an external input. Cutoff frequency is 11-bit (0..2047) composed of high byte and low 3 bits; formula FREQUENCY = (REGISTER VALUE * 5.8) + 30 Hz approx. Resonance control peaks frequencies near cutoff.

$D415-$D418               Filter Controls

                          In addition to the controls detailed above for each voice, the SID
                          chip also provides a filtering capability which allows you to
                          attenuate (make quieter) certain ranges of frequencies.  Any one or
                          all three voices can be filtered, and there is even a provision for
                          filtering an external signal that is input through pin 5 of the
                          monitor jack.

                          A low-pass filter is available, which suppresses the volume of those
                          frequency components that are above a designated cutoff level.  The
                          high-pass filter reduces the volume of frequency components that are
                          below a certain level.  The band-pass filter reduces the volume of
                          frequency components on both sides of the chosen frequency, thereby
                          enhancing that frequency.  Finally, the high-pass and low-pass filters
                          can be combined to form a notch reject filter, which reduces the
                          volume of the frequency components nearest the selected frequency.
                          These various filters can dramatically change the quality of the sound
                          produced.

                          The first two registers are used to select the filter cutoff
                          frequency.  This is the frequency above or below which any sounds will
                          be made quieter.  The further away from this level any frequency
                          components are, the more their output volume will be suppressed (high-
                          and low-pass filters reduce the volume of those components by 12 dB
                          per octave away from the center frequency, while the band-pass filter
                          attenuates them by 6 dB per octave).

                          The cutoff frequency has an 11-bit range (which corresponds to the
                          numbers 0 to 2047).  This is made up of a high-byte and three low
                          bits.  Therefore, to compute the frequency represented by the value in
                          these registers, you must multiply the value in the high byte by 8,
                          and add the value of the low three bits.  The range of cutoff
                          frequencies represented by these 2048 values stretches from 30 Hz to
                          about 12,000 Hz.  The exact frequency may be calculated with the
                          formula:

                          FREQUENCY=(REGISTER VALUE*5.8)+30Hz

                          An additional element in filtering is the resonance control.  This
                          allows you to peak the volume of the frequency elements nearest the
                          cutoff frequency.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "d415_cutlo_low_cutoff_low_bits" which expands on Low bits of cutoff ($D415)
- "d416_cuthi_cutoff_high_byte" which expands on High byte of cutoff ($D416)
- "d417_resonance_control" which expands on Resonance and routing bits ($D417)
