# - C64 I/O Map (Mapping The Commodore 64) - Typical SID usage sequence: set overall volume (Volume register), set 16-bit frequency (two bytes), set ADSR via Attack/Decay and Sustain/Release registers, select waveform & gate via Control register to start note; keep waveform bit set when gating off to allow Release; note that most SID registers are write-only.


                          Often the first step is to select an overall volume level using the
                          Volume Register.  Then, the desired frequency or pitch of the note is
                          chosen by writing to each of the two bytes which make up the 16-bit
                          Frequency Register.

                          An ADSR envelope setting must be chosen by writing values to the
                          Attack/ Decay and Sustain/Release Register.  These determine the rate
                          of the rise and fall of the volume of the note from zero volume to
                          peak volume and back again.  These rates have a great influence on the
                          character of the sound.

                          Finally, the waveform must be selected, and the note started (or the
                          oscillator gated, as we say).  This is done by writing certain bits to
                          the Control Register.  The waveform control lets you select one of
                          four different waveforms, each of which has varying harmonic content
                          that affects the tone quality of the sound.  By writing a 1 to the
                          gate bit, you start the Attack/ Delay/Sustain cycle.  After rising to a
                          peak and declining to the Sustain volume, the volume will continue at
                          the same level until you write a 0 to the gate bit.  Then, the Release
                          cycle will start.  Make sure that you keep the same waveform bit set
                          to 1 while you write the 0 to the gate bit, so that the Release cycle
                          starts.  Otherwise, the sound will stop entirely, as it also will if
                          the Volume Register or the Frequency Register is set to 0.

                          It should be noted that except for the last four SID chip registers,
                          these addresses are write-only.  That means that their values cannot
                          be determined by PEEKing these locations.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "d418_sigvol_volume_and_filter_select" which expands on Overall volume and filter select ($D418)
- "voice1_frequency_and_control" which expands on Voice 1 frequency and VCREG1 details
