# Contents - SID overview: Sound Interface Device (SID) supports 3 independent voices over >6 octaves, ADSR envelope controls (attack, decay, sustain, release), multiple waveforms (triangle, sawtooth, pulse/rectangular with pulse-width control, and noise). Channel 3 noise mode can be read by CPU to obtain a random value.




35 



Chapter 8 
Sound Effects 



One of the most advanced features of the Com- 
modore 64 is its ability to generate sounds. Built 
into the Commodore 64 is a highly advanced sound 
generator, the sound interface device or SID chip. 
This chip has the capability of generating three in- 
dependent tones over a range of more than six oc- 
taves. It has controls in each channel to control the 
attack, decay, and release times, and a sustain level 
for the volume of each channel. In fact, most of the 
features found in a musical synthesizer can be found 
in the SID chip. 

Figures 8-1, 8-2, 8-3, and 8-4 show some of the 
different waveforms that the SID chip can generate. 
Figure 8-1 shows a triangular waveform, which will 
produce the cleanest tone, as it is a fairly close ap- 
proximation of a pure sine wave. Figure 8-2 shows 
a sawtooth waveform. You will notice that it has 
sharper edges to it than the triangular waveform. 
Sharp edges on a waveform tend to generate various 
harmonics of the tone, so in general, the sharper the 
edges in a waveform, the more harmonics will be 
generated. The differences in the harmonic content 
can be heard as a difference in harshness of the tone. 



A triangular waveform will produce a very smooth, 
soft tone, while the square waveform, as shown in 
Fig. 8-3, produces a very sharp biting tone. When 
you select the square waveform in the SID chip, you 
have extra control over the tone of the sound. You 
can program in a pulsewidth for the wave, which 
varies the symmetry of the square wave. Depending 
on the settings that you use, the waveform will be 
more rectangular than square, as shown in Fig. 8-4. 
The SID chip can also generate a noise 
waveform. This is a random signal that changes at 
the oscillator frequency. Many games will use this 
waveform to generate explosions, wind storms, or 
any type of sound that is not a specific tone. In ad- 
dition, if channel 3 is set to generate noise, the 
amplitude of the waveform can be read by the 
microprocessor at any time. Because this is a con- 
standy changing value, the number read will be a 
random number. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sid_filters_and_subtractive_synthesis" which expands on send voices through SID filters for richer timbres
- "sound_generator_demo" which expands on demo of SID waveforms and envelopes
