# COMMODORE 64 - High-level description of the MOS 6581 SID synthesizer. Explains that the 6581 has three synth 'voices' (each with a Tone Oscillator/Waveform Generator, Envelope Generator, and Amplitude Modulator), the oscillator's role in pitch and waveform generation (four waveforms), envelope-driven amplitude modulation with programmable attack/decay/sustain/release, the programmable filter for subtractive synthesis, the ability to read the third oscillator and envelope for modulation or RNG use, two A/D converters for paddles/potentiometers, and support for external audio chaining/mixing.

  DESCRIPTION

    The 6581 consists of three synthesizer "voices" which can be used
  independently or in conjunction with each other (or external audio
  sources) to create complex sounds. Each voice consists of a Tone
  Oscillator/Waveform Generator, an Envelope Generator and an Amplitude
  Modulator. The Tone Oscillator controls the pitch of the voice over a
  wide range. The Oscillator produces four waveforms at the selected
  frequency, with the unique harmonic content of each waveform providing
  simple control of tone color. The volume dynamics of the oscillator are
  controlled by the Amplitude Modulator under the direction of the Envelope
  Generator. When triggered, the Envelope Generator creates an amplitude
  envelope with programmable rates of increasing and decreasing volume. In
  addition to the three voices, a programmable Filter is provided for
  generating complex, dynamic tone colors via subtractive synthesis.
    SID allows the microprocessor to read the changing output of the third
  Oscillator and third Envelope Generator. These outputs can be used as a
  source of modulation information for creating vibrato, frequency/filter
  sweeps and similar effects. The third oscillator can also act as a random
  number generator for games. Two A/D converters are provided for inter-
  facing SID with potentiometers. These can be used for "paddles" in a
  game environment or as front panel controls in a music synthesizer. SID
  can process external audio signals, allowing multiple SID chips to be
  daisy-chained or mixed in complex polyphonic systems.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sid_block_diagram_placeholder" which expands on visual block diagram placeholder and page header/footer
- "sid_control_registers_and_map" which expands on register-level control (addresses and bit fields) for the described features
