# Contents - SID filtering and subtractive synthesis: SID provides low-pass, band-pass, and high-pass filters. Filters can be combined (effects additive) — e.g., low+high = notch. Low-pass attenuates >cutoff at 12dB/octave (full sound); band-pass attenuates above and below cutoff at 6dB/octave (thin sound); high-pass attenuates <cutoff at 12dB/octave (tinny). Filters can be modulated in real time to produce dynamic effects like wind or jets.



FILTERING 

After you have created a sound, you can change 



36 




9 8-1. Triangular waveform. 




: <3 8-2. Sawtooth waveform. 



37 




Fig. 8-fl, Square waveform. 



Fig. 8-4. Rectangular waveform. 
38 



it drastically by having the sound pass through one 
or more types of filters. An audio filter changes the 
sound by cutting down the volume of certain fre- 
quencies. Different types of filters will modify a 
sound in different ways. Each channel can be in- 
dividually selected as to whether or not it will be 
passed through the filter. 

The ability to route the audio outputs through 
one or more filters is a very powerful feature of the 
Commodore 64. Unlike most computers, which 
allow you to generate only simple tones, the filter- 
ing modes of the SID chip allow you to generate 
complex tones by modifying the harmonic content 
of the tones. The filters accomplish this task through 
a technique known as subtractive synthesis. By us- 
ing an input source that is high in harmonics, the 
filter can selectively eliminate specific frequencies. 
Depending on the filtering mode, the same initial 
tone can be used to create many different sounds. 
In addition to using the filtering modes in a static 
fashion (setting them and leaving them), you can 
control the filter settings in real time. By doing so, 
you will be able to create sounds such as wind 



storms and jet engines. These are sounds that can- 
not normally be generated well by a home computer. 

There are three types of filters in the SID chip, 
a low pass filter, a band pass filter, and a high pass 
filter. More than one type of filter can be selected 
at one time. When multiple filters are selected, the 
effects are additive. A notch filter can be created 
by selecting both the low pass and high pass filters. 
The filters will affect the sound in the following 

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sid_overview_waveforms_and_noise" which expands on filtering applied to base waveforms (triangle, saw, pulse, noise)
