# byRiclianll - Definition and differences between soft and hard read/write DOS errors: hard errors occur in header blocks (never rewritten) and are unrecoverable; soft errors occur in data blocks and can sometimes be recovered. Provides a short table indicating which reported error numbers are soft vs hard (examples: 22/20 read errors, 23/21 read errors, other codes listed). Also introduces two recovery utilities in Appendix C (RECOVER TRACK & SECTOR and LAZARUS) and explains their roles: RECOVER TRACK & SECTOR tries to rewrite a damaged sector; LAZARUS attempts to resurrect an entire diskette and reports read/write error counts.

8.2  Recovering  a  Soft  Error 

In  Chapter  7  we  described  in  detail  the  read/write  DOS  errors.  We  did  not,  however, 
categorize  these  errors  by  type.  Read/write  errors  fall  into  two  categories:  "hard"  er- 
rors and  "soft"  errors.  A  hard  error  is  one  that  cannot  be  recovered,  period.  Hard  er- 
rors are  errors  that  occur  in  a  header  block.  Recall  that  a  header  block  is  never  rewrit- 
ten after  initial  formatting.  Since  a  header  block  cannot  be  rewritten,  the  data  in  a  sec- 
tor containing  a  hard  error  is  unrecoverable.  (Unfortunately,  this  also  means  that  the 
forward  pointer  has  been  lost  and,  for  all  intents  and  purposes,  the  remainder  of  the 
file  as  well.)  Soft  errors  are  errors  that  occur  in  a  data  block.  Since  data  blocks  can  be 
rewritten,  soft  errors  can  sometimes  be  recovered  if  the  diskette  itself  is  not  flawed 
or  physically  damaged.  The  table  below  indicates  whether  a  read/write  error  is  a  hard 
or  soft  error. 

Soft  Errors  Hard  Errors 


22  Read  Error  20  Read  Error 

23  Read  Error  21  Read  Error 

27  Read  Error 
29  Read  Error 

Appendix  C  contains  two  programs  that  are  useful  in  trying  to  recover  a  sector  that 
has  a  soft  error.  However,  recovery  cannot  be  guaranteed  in  all  cases.  These  two  pro- 
grams are  RECOVER  TRACK  &  SECTOR  and  LAZARUS.  The  first  program  attempts 
to  rewrite  a  damaged  sector.  LAZARUS  will  attempt  to  resurrect  an  entire  diskette. 
The  latter  program  returns  a  status  report  of  the  number  of  read  errors  encountered. 
It  also  reports  the  number  of  write  errors  that  occurred.  A  write  error  indicates  that 
a  soft  error  encountered  along  the  way  was  actually  a  hard  error  in  disguise.  Sorry  about 
that. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "recovering_hard_error" which expands on If an error is identified as a hard error, follow the hard-error recovery procedure
- "recovering_soft_error" which expands on If an error is soft, use RECOVER TRACK & SECTOR or LAZARUS (Appendix C) to attempt recovery
