# Contents - Details on the Sound Editor program: lists that C-10 is the source and C-11 the assembled code; describes the editor's screen display of all SID registers using Chapter 3 naming conventions; explains cursor-driven editing of SID register fields where values are entered in hexadecimal notation so they can be used in an assembler; notes the ability to transfer edited data to the SID (producing sound if a channel is enabled); gives the commands to load and run the editor (LOAD "SOUND EDIT",8,1 and SYS 4096); and begins Table 8-1 listing controls (cursor keys to move between fields and the hex digit keys 0-9 shown within the covered lines).


43 




Frequency 



C-10 is the source coed; Listing C-l 1 is the assem- 
bled code. The Sound Editor shows all the SID 
chips' registers on the Screen using the naming con- 
ventions discussed in Chapter 3. A cursor can be 
moved around the screen, allowing you to change 
the values that will be loaded into any of the SID 
registers. All of the numbers are typed onto the 
screen in hexadecimal notation, so the data that you 
create can be easily entered into your assembler. 
After all of the data fields that you care to change 
have been updated, you can instruct the Sound 
Editor to transfer the data to the SID chip. If you 
have enabled one of the channels, this should pro- 
duce a sound. To run the Sound Editor, type: 

LOAD"SOUND EDIT", 8, 1 
SYS 4096 

The controls for the Sound Editor are shown in 
Table 8-1. 



Table 8-1. The Controls for the Sound Editor Program. 

CURSOR DOWN Moves the cursor down one field 

CURSOR UP Moves the cursor up one field 

CURSOR RIGHT Moves the cursor one field to the 
right 

CURSOR LEFT Moves the cursor one field to the 
left 



0-9 
A-F 

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sid_sound_effects_and_tremolo" which expands on Explains how to implement and test the sound effects and tunes described earlier using the Sound Editor
- "sound_editor_intro" which expands on Continues the introduction and points to the Appendix C listings
- "figure_pages_41_44_ignored" which expands on Figures that appear nearby in the original source document
