# Contents - Importance of sound effects and difficulty design: sound effects/music add immersion; keep background music low relative to effects and provide option to disable. Difficulty levels should vary speed, enemy behavior, and possibly introduce new characters; changing difficulty based on player skill (self-adjusting difficulty, SAD) keeps play engaging (example: Return of the Phoenix adjusts skill level automatically and reduces difficulty when player performance drops).

SOUND EFFECTS 

Sound effects and music can add greatly to the 



DIFFICULTY LEVELS 

Virtually every game has different difficulty 
levels. The variations can range from simply in- 
creasing he speed of some of the characters at dif- 
ferent sco es to starting a completely different 
portion of t e game after a task is completed. For 
the most part, a game will be the same each time 
that it is played. Changing the level of difficulty 
based on the skill of the player will keep the player 
interested in playing the game even after he has 
mastered the beginning levels. Presenting him with 
a new challenge as a reward for gaining skill in the 
game will help to keep the player interested. You 
can make the game more fun to play by increasing 
the speed of the characters at higher levels and in- 
creasing the amount of shooting that the player is 
allowed to do. Some games will introduce a new 
character at each new difficulty level, so the player 
will keep playing in order to see all of the different 
characters. 

In the game Return of the Phoenix, Listing C-23 
in Appendix C, each new level of difficulty has a 
new speed for the characters and a different rate 
of fire. The level of difficulty is decided by the 
players' skill. If he is playing well, the level of play 
will increase. When the player starts doing poorly, 



62 



the level of play will be reduced. This self adjusting 
difficulty (SAD) system keeps the game interesting 
by constantly adjusting the level of game play to the 
player. 




---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "phoenix_gameplay_mechanics" which expands on example of self-adjusting difficulty in Return of the Phoenix
