# ********* - How sprite shape bytes map to 24-dot lines (3 bytes per line): bit significance (bits 0-7 values), examples of byte patterns and their decimal equivalents, building multi-line sprites (example cross with 63 bytes and their layout).

have to contend with these slight delays.

If you turn off the 64 display with a POKE 53265,PEEEK(53265) AND 239,
you will be able to load programs correctly from an old 1540 drive.
The new 1541 drive transfers data at a slightly slower rate in the
default setting, and can be set from software to transfer it at the
higher rate for the VIC-20.

Bit 5.  Setting Bit 5 of this register to 1 enables the bitmap
graphics mode.  In this mode, the screen area is broken down into
64,000 separate dots of light, 320 dots across by 200 dots high.  Each
dot corresponds to one bit of display memory.  If the bit is set to 1,
the dot will be displayed in the foreground color.  If the bit is
reset to 0, it will be displayed in the background color.  This allows
the display of high-resolution graphics images for games, charts, and
graphs, etc.

Bitmapping is a common technique for implementing high-resolution
graphics on a microcomputer.  There are some features of the Commodore
system which are unusual, however.

Most systems display screen memory sequentially; that is, the first
byte controls the display of the first eight dots in the upper-left
corner of the screen, the second byte controls the eight dots to the
right of that, etc.  In the Commodore system, display memory is laid
out more along the lines of how character graphics dot-data is
arranged.

The first byte controls the row of eight dots in the top-left corner
of the screen, but the next byte controls the eight dots below that,
and so on until the ninth byte.  The ninth byte controls the eight
dots directly to the right of those controlled by the first byte of
display memory.  It is exactly the same as if the screen were filled
with 1000 programmable characters, with display memory taking the
place of the character dot-data.

The 64's bitmap graphics mode also resembles character graphics in
that the foreground color of the dots is set by a color map (although
it does not use the Color RAM for this purpose).  Four bits of each
byte of this color memory control the foreground color of one of these
eight-byte groups of display memory (which form an 8 by 8 grid of 64
dots).  Unlike character graphics, however, the other four bits
control the background color that will be seen in the eight-byte
display group where a bit has a value of 0.

Setting up a bitmap graphics screen is somewhat more complicated than
just setting this register bit to 1.  You must first choose a location
for the display memory area, and for the color memory area.  The
display memory area will be 8192 bytes long (8000 of which are
actually used for the display) and can occupy only the first or the
second half of the 16K space which the VIC-II chip can address.

Each byte of bitmap graphics color memory uses four bits for the
background color as well as four bits for the foreground color.
Therefore, the Color RAM nybbles at 55296 ($D800), which are wired for
four bits only, cannot be used.  Another RAM location must therefore
be found for color memory.

This color memory area will take up 1K (1000 bytes of which are
actually used to control the foreground and background colors of the
dots), and must be in the opposite half of VIC-II memory as the
display data.  Since bitmap graphics require so much memory for the
display, you may want to select a different 16K bank for VIC-II memory
(see the discussion of things to consider in selecting a VIC-II memory
bank at location 56576 ($DD00)).

To keep things simple, however, let's assume that you have selected to
use the default bank of VIC-II memory, which is the first 16K.  You
would have to select locations 8192-16383 ($2000-$3FFF) for screen
memory, because the VIC-II chip sees an image of the character ROM in
the first half of the 16K block (at locations 4096-8192
($1000-$1FFF)).  Color memory could be placed at the default location
of text display memory, at 1024-2047 ($400-$7FF).  Placement of bitmap
display and color memory is controlled by the VIC Memory Control
Register at 53272 ($D018).

When in bitmap mode, the lower four bits of this register, which
normally control the base address of character dot-data, now control
the location of the 8K bitmap.  Only Bit 3 is significant.  If it is
set to 1, the graphics display memory will be in the second 8K of
VIC-II memory (in this case, starting at 8192 ($2000)).  If that bit
contains a 0, the first 8K will be used for the bitmap.  The upper
four bits of this register, which normally control the location of the
Video Display Matrix, are used in bitmap mode to establish the
location of the color map within the VIC-II address space.  These four
bits can hold a number from 0 to 15, which indicates on which 1K
boundary the color map begins.  For example, if color memory began at
1024 (1K), the value of these four bits would be 0001.

Once the bitmap mode has been selected, and the screen and color
memory areas set up, you must establish a method for turning each
individual dot on and off.  The conventional method for identifying
each dot is to assign it to a horizontal (X) position coordinate and a
vertical (Y) coordinate.

Horizontal position values will range from 0 to 319, where dot 0 is at
the extreme left-hand side of the screen, and dot 319 at the extreme
right.  Vertical positions will range from 0 to 199, where dot 0 is on
the top line, and dot 199 is on the bottom line.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sprite_graphics_introduction_and_data_pointers" which expands on Pointers map to these 63-byte blocks
