# Sprite Multiplexing Techniques by Cadaver (Lasse Oorni) - Defines the unsorted and sorted sprite arrays and their purposes: unsorted arrays sprx (X), spry (Y), sprc (color), sprf (frame). Sorted arrays: sortsprx, sortspry, sortsprc, sortsprf. sortorder = sorted list of indexes to unsorted table (may need zeropage).

2.1 Sorting the sprites

Please note: the sort algorithm of chapter 2.1.5 ("Ocean" algorithm) seems to
be superior to all the others in this rant. I use it in MW4 and have been very
satisfied. Please consider using it for your actual C64 projects and think of
other algorithms being presented here only for educational purposes.

I'll be mainly giving pseudocode (C-like) examples here. Yes, in some way this
is "cheating" in a C64 programming rant but I'm sure it gives a better
understanding of the algorithms than trying to follow an already optimized &
cryptic ASM implementation (and you get to see a lot of that in those game
source codes, links are at the end of this rant)

So, what we start with is probably a random order of Y-coordinates in the
"virtual sprite" Y-coordinate array (whatever the main program is coming up
with). What we want as an end result is a nicely Y-sorted list of sprites to
work with.

Now it's also time to explain the array names used in these examples (they're
actually the same I use in my C64 source code.)

The "virtual" sprite arrays (unsorted):
sprx - Unsorted X coordinates
spry - Unsorted Y coordinates
sprc - Unsorted colors
sprf - Unsorted sprite frame numbers

The sorted sprite arrays:
sortsprx  - Sorted X coordinates
sortspry  - Sorted Y coordinates
sortsprc  - Sorted colors
sortsprf  - Sorted sprite frame numbers
sortorder - Sorted list of indexes to unsorted table (not used in every example)
            Needs to be on the zeropage to allow certain indexing operations


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "continuous_insertion_sort_ocean_algorithm" which expands on uses sortorder index array for fast incremental sorting
- "bubblesort_for_sprites" which expands on alternative sorting method that also needs index tracking
