# Contents - Collision detection: VIC detects collisions between nontransparent portions of sprites and between sprite and background. Sprite-to-sprite collisions set bits in SSCOL ($D01E); reading SSCOL clears it, so store value before analyzing. SSCOL shows which sprites were involved but not pair-wise which hit which. Sprite-to-background collisions use SBCOL ($D01F); in multicolor modes bit pair 01 is treated as transparent for collision detection. Data cleared after read.


Each sprite can be individually selected to either 
have a higher priority than the background or a 
lower priority. If the sprite's bit in the I 
($D01B) register is clear, the sprite will appear tc 
pass in front of the background. When the bit for 
the sprite is set in the BPRIOR register, the sprite 
will appear to move behind the background image 
and in front of the background color. Because sprites 
can have transparent as one of their colors, any 
sprite that passes behind a higher priority sprite 
with transparent in it will show through in the 
transparent areas. 

COLLISION DETECTION 

The VIC chip can detect collisions between 
sprites and also between a sprite and the 
background. The VIC chip will defect collisions be- 
tween the nontransparent portions of sprites. 

When a collision between two sprites occurs, 
their bits are set in the SSCOL ($D01E) register. 
The data in the SSCOL register will stay valid un- 
til the byte is read. After the register is read, the 
data will be cleared, so it is important to store the 
data somewhere before analyzing it. The VIC chip 
will detect a collision even if the sprites are off the 
screen. One thing that should be noted is that the 
SSCOL register will only tell you which sprites are 



32 



involved in collisions, not which sprite hit which 
sprite. If you are multiplexing sprites, the data in 
the SSCOL register may be useless. 

Sprite to background collisions are handled in 
almost the same way. The SBCOL ($D01F) register 
will detect a collision between the nontransparent 
portion of a sprite and the background. In a 
multicolor screen mode, the bit pair 01 is considered 

transparent for collision detection. Like the SSCOL 
register, the data is cleared after reading it. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "video_interrupts_virq_and_virqm" which expands on sprite/scanline collisions can set VIRQ bits for interrupts
