# The MOS 6567/6569 video controller (VIC-II) and its application in the Commodore 64 - Lists the main rules (cycles valid for the 6569) governing sprite display steps 1–6: initialization of expansion flip-flop (MxYE in $D017), inversion on cycle 55 if MxYE set, checks in cycles 55/56 for MxE in $D015 and Y coordinate to enable DMA and clear MCBASE, loading MC from MCBASE in phase 1 of cycle 58 and enabling display if DMA and Y match, the s-access sequence (three reads stored into the 24-bit shift register and MC increments after each s-access), and shifting/out output behavior when the raster X matches sprite X (including X-expansion behavior from MxXE in $D01D and multicolor grouping).

The display of a sprite is done after the following rules (the cycle
numbers are only valid for the 6569):

1. The expansion flip flip is set as long as the bit in MxYE in register
   $d017 corresponding to the sprite is cleared.

2. If the MxYE bit is set in the first phase of cycle 55, the expansion
   flip flop is inverted.

3. In the first phases of cycle 55 and 56, the VIC checks for every sprite
   if the corresponding MxE bit in register $d015 is set and the Y
   coordinate of the sprite (odd registers $d001-$d00f) match the lower 8
   bits of RASTER. If this is the case and the DMA for the sprite is still
   off, the DMA is switched on, MCBASE is cleared, and if the MxYE bit is
   set the expansion flip flip is reset.

4. In the first phase of cycle 58, the MC of every sprite is loaded from
   its belonging MCBASE (MCBASE->MC) and it is checked if the DMA for the
   sprite is turned on and the Y coordinate of the sprite matches the lower
   8 bits of RASTER. If this is the case, the display of the sprite is
   turned on.

5. If the DMA for a sprite is turned on, three s-accesses are done in
   sequence in the corresponding cycles assigned to the sprite (see the
   diagrams in section 3.6.3.). The p-accesses are always done, even if the
   sprite is turned off. The read data of the first access is stored in the
   upper 8 bits of the shift register, that of the second one in the middle
   8 bits and that of the third one in the lower 8 bits. MC is incremented
   by one after each s-access.

6. If the sprite display for a sprite is turned on, the shift register is
   shifted left by one bit with every pixel as soon as the current X
   coordinate of the raster beam matches the X coordinate of the sprite
   (even registers $d000-$d00e), and the bits that "fall off" are
   displayed. If the MxXE bit belonging to the sprite in register $d01d is
   set, the shift is done only every second pixel and the sprite appears
   twice as wide. If the sprite is in multicolor mode, every two adjacent
   bits form one pixel.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "s_access_timing_and_bus_takeover" which expands on Which cycles include the s-accesses and how they relate to p-access timing
- "sprite_data_sequencer_and_registers" which expands on Where the s-access read data are stored (24-bit shift register) and MC increment behavior
- "sprite_display_rules_7_and_8" which expands on Continuation: MCBASE adjustments and termination of DMA/display
