# - C64 I/O Map (Mapping The Commodore 64) - Detailed rules about what counts as a collision: only sprite shape bits of 1 (or nonzero multicolor pairs other than 01) can collide; invisible sprites with all-zero shape bytes never collide; collisions can be detected even in border-covered areas; ambiguous multi-sprite collisions may require positional checks to determine exact pairing.

                          Note that while these registers tell you what sprites were involved in
                          a collision, they do not necessarily tell you what objects have
                          collided with each other.  It is quite possible to have three sprites
                          lined up in a row, where Sprite A is on the left, Sprite B is in the
                          middle, touching Sprite A, and Sprite C is on the right, touching
                          Sprite B but not touching Sprite A.  The Sprite-Sprite Collision
                          register would show that all three are involved.  The only way to make
                          absolutely certain which collided with which is to check the position
                          of each sprite, and calculate for each sprite display line if a sprite
                          of that size would touch either of the others.  As you can imagine,
                          this is no easy task.

                          There are a few simple rules concerning what does or does not cause a
                          collision.  Though the sprite character consists of 504 dots in a 24
                          by 21 matrix, does which represent data bits that are equal to 0 (or
                          multicolor bit- pairs equal to 00), and therefore always displayed in
                          the background color, do not count when it comes to collision.

                          A collision can occur only if a dot which represents a sprite shape
                          data bit of 1 touches another dot of nonzero graphics data.  Consider
                          the case of two invisible sprites.  The first sprite is enabled, its
                          color set to contrast the background, and it is positioned on the
                          screen, but its shape data bytes are all 0.  This sprite can never be
                          involved in a collision, because it displays no nonzero data.  The
                          second sprite is enabled, positioned on the screen, and its shape
                          pointer set for a data read that is filled with bytes having a value
                          of 255.  Even if that sprite's color is set to the same value as the
                          background color, making the sprite invisible, it can still be
                          involved in collisions.  The only exception to this rule is the 01
                          bit-pair of multicolor graphics data.  This bit-pair is considered
                          part of the background, and the dot it displays can never be involved
                          in a collision.

                          The other rule to remember about collisions is that they can occur in
                          areas that are covered by the screen border.  Collision between
                          sprites can occur when the sprites are offscreen, and collisions
                          between sprites and foreground display data can occur when that data
                          is in an area that is covered by the border due to the reduction of
                          the display to 38 columns or 24 rows.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sprite_collision_detection_registers_intro" which expands on Where to read which sprites were involved ($D01E-$D01F)
