# Contents - Description of the supplied Sprite Maker utility (LISTING C-17 with ML routines SLIB.O and CLSP2). Features: create one-color or multicolor sprites, change sprite/background colors, view sprite zoomed and in true size; control interface: joystick to move cursor; FIRE to plot/unplot; F1 toggles plot mode; F3/F4 enable/disable multicolor mode; F5 changes sprite color; F6 background color; F7/F8 change multicolor registers; S saves sprite; L loads sprite. Sprite binary data saved at $4000-$403F by the program; advice to move data to a safe area if merging sprites.

USING THE SPRITE MAKER 

Listing C-17 in Appendix C is a sprite making 
utility in BASIC. It loads two machine language 
routines, SLIB.O in Listing C-18 and CLSP2 in 
Listing C-19. Using this program, you will be able 
to quickly create a sprite in either the one color or 
multicolor mode. You will be able to change any of 
the colors in the sprite or the background color. 
After you have finished designing a sprite, you will 
be able to save it to the disk for use in a program 
later. As you are drawing your sprite on the screen, 
you will be plotting squares on a 24 by 2 1 array of 
squares on the left side of the screen. In the upper 
right section of the screen, the sprite is shown in 



its true size and color, so you will be able to see ex- 
actly what the finished sprite will look like, in the 
upper left corner of the screen, there will be a white 
box if you are in the plot mode; otherwise you will 
be in the unplot mode and the corner will be blank. 
To run the Sprite Maker program, you must 
type the following: 

LOAD"SPRITE MAKER", 8 
RUN 



Enter the name to be used when saving or 
loading from disk. 

The SPRITE MAKER uses a combination of 
joystick and keyboard controls. All of the control 
options are shown below. 

JOYSTICK Moves the cursor around 

the zoomed sprite 
FIRE BUTTON Plots or unplots a point 
Fl Toggles the plotting mode 

F3 Enables the multicolor mode 

F4 Disables the multicolor mode 

F5 Changes the sprite color 

F6 Changes the background color 

F7 Changes the multicolor 1 

register 
F8 Changes the multicolor 

register 
S Saves the sprite to the disk 

L Loads the sprite from the disk 

The joystick will move the cursor around the 
screen. When the fire button is pressed, a square 
will either be plotted or unplotted, depending on the 
plot mode at the time. Pressing the Fl key toggles 
the plotting mode. The mode is set to OFF when 
the program is first run. The F3 key will enable the 
multicolor mode. Pressing the F4 key disables the 
multicolor mode. The multicolor mode is off when 
the program is first run. Pressing F5 will increment 
the sprite color register. The F6 key increments the 
background color. Pressing F7 will increment the 
sprite multicolor 1 register. This will only show an 
effect when the multicolor mode has been selected. 
Pressing F8 will increment the sprite multicolor 



55 



register. This will only show an effect when the 
multicolor mode has been selected. Pressing the S 
button will save the sprite to the disk using the name 
that you had entered earlier. Pressing the L button 
will load a sprite pattern from the disk with the 
name that you entered earlier. 

After you have finished editing a sprite, the 
sprite data will be at $4000. By using a machine 
language monitor, you will be able to save the binary 
sprite data from $4000 to $403F. If you will be us- 
ing multiple sprites, you may wish to move the data 
to a safe area in memory so that you can merge your 
new sprites with the old ones. 


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "screen_maker_utility" which expands on related utility for building character screens
