# COMMODORE 64 - Standard Character Mode: default mode on power-up. Characters sourced from ROM or RAM (programmable). VIC-II uses screen memory to determine character code and color memory for color per character. Character address calculation formula: CHARACTER ADDRESS = SCREEN CODE*8 + (CHARACTER SET*2048) + (BANK*16384). Each character is 8x8 dots, stored as 8 bytes (one byte per row; each bit is a dot). Example shows binary rows and corresponding decimal PEEK values (e.g., A pattern rows such as 00011000 -> 24). Notes that full char set is 2K and char ROM total 4K for both upper/lower sets.


  STANDARD CHARACTER MODE

    Standard character mode is the mode the Commodore 64 is in when you
  first turn it on. It is the mode you will generally program in.
    Characters can be taken from ROM or from RAM, but normally they are
  taken from ROM. When you want special graphics characters for a program,
  all you have to do is define the new character shapes in RAM, and tell
  the VIC-II chip to get its character information from there instead of
  the character ROM. This is covered in more detail in the next section.
    In order to display characters on the screen in color, the VIC-II chip
  accesses the screen memory to determine the character code for that
  location on the screen. At the same time, it accesses the color memory to
  determine what color you want for the character displayed. The character
  code is translated by the VIC-II into the starting address of the 8-byte
  block holding your character pattern. The 8-byte block is located in
  character memory.
    The translation isn't too complicated, but a number of items are com-
  bined to generate the desired address. First the character code you use
  to POKE screen memory is multiplied by 8. Next add the start of char-
  acter memory (see CHARACTER MEMORY section). Then the Bank Select Bits
  are taken into account by adding in the base address (see VIDEO BANK
  SELECTION section). Below is a simple formula to illustrate what happens:

  CHARACTER ADDRESS = SCREEN CODE*8+(CHARACTER SET*2048)+(BANK*16384)



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "character_memory_overview" which expands on where character patterns are stored and how VIC-II computes addresses
