# 6502 Instruction Set - Store instructions STA, STX, STY opcode tables (zeropage, zpg,X/Y, absolute, absolute,X/Y, (indirect,X), (indirect),Y). Transfer instructions TAX, TAY, TSX, TXA, TXS, TYA details (operations, flags, opcodes). Notes and footnotes about page boundary cycle penalties and branch penalties; legend for flags (+ modified, - not modified) and assembler syntax notes (forced zeropage), and a note on NMOS read-modify-write behavior causing two writes (NMOS only) which can affect devices on the bus.

                            M6 .... memory bit 6
                            M7 .... memory bit 7
          Note on assembler syntax:
          Some assemblers employ "OPC *oper" or a ".b" extension to the mneomonic for
          forced zeropage addressing.
          Note on Read-Modify-Write instructions (NMOS 6502 only):
          Some instructions, like EOR, ASL, ROL, DEC, INC, etc., fetch a value from memory
          to modify it and to write the modified value back to the originating address.
          The original NMOS 6502 switches immediately into write mode after the read of
          the value, resulting in the unmodified value being written back to the address
          (while the value is modified in the next cycle), before the modified value is
          finally written to the destination.
          Normally, this should be of no concern, but it may cause issues when writing to
          a device attached to the address bus that may trigger some action on any write
          operation, as this address will be strobed twice (once for the intermediate,
          unmodified write-back operation and a second time when writing the modified
          value.)
          This does not apply to the CMOS variants of the 6502.
          Implementation Specific Details
          The following sections cover traits specific to the implementation, like the
          original NMOS version and variants by MOS Technology or the CMOS version by
          Western Design Center (WDC).
          "Illegal" Opcodes and Undocumented Instructions
                  The following instructions are undocumented are not guaranteed to work.
                  Some are highly unstable, some may even start two asynchronous threads
                  competing in race condition with the winner determined by such miniscule
                  factors as temperature or minor differences in the production series, at other
                  times, the outcome depends on the exact values involved and the chip series.
                                                                  6502 Instruction Set
                 Use with care and at your own risk.
                 Please mind that this section applies to the original NMOS version of the 6502
                 by MOS Technology (and its variants, like the 6507 or 6510) only, but not to
                 the later CMOS versions, like the W65C02S by Western Design Center (WDC). The
                 latter either use these opcodes to implement extensions to the standard NMOS
                 instruction set or will execute a NOP for any instruction codes still
                 undefined.
                 There are several mnemonics for various opcodes. Here, they are (mostly) the
                 same as those used by the ACME and DASM assemblers with known synonyms provided
                 in parentheses:
                     ALR (ASR)
                     ANC
                     ANC (ANC2)
                     ANE (XAA)
                     ARR
                     DCP (DCM)
                     ISC (ISB, INS)
                     LAS (LAR)
                     LAX
                     LXA (LAX immediate)
                     RLA
                     RRA
                     SAX (AXS, AAX)
                     SBX (AXS, SAX)
                     SHA (AHX, AXA)
                     SHX (A11, SXA, XAS)
                     SHY (A11, SYA, SAY)
                     SLO (ASO)
                     SRE (LSE)
                     TAS (XAS, SHS)
                     USBC (SBC)

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "note_on_read_modify_write" which expands on NMOS read-modify-write double write caveat
- "w65c02_and_implementation_specifics" which expands on CMOS vs NMOS differences and WDC enhancements
