# MACHINE - Summary of key points ('Things You Have Learned'): JSR, RTS, SYS, CHROUT at $FFD2, monitor assembler and disassembler, immediate addressing (#), index registers X/Y and INX/DEX/INY/DEY. Followed by Questions and Projects: exercises using ASCII table, clearing screen with ASCII $93, printing messages, counting up vs down with X, using cursor movements and color to draw a box with HELLO inside.

This method of saving a machine language program is clean and trouble free,
but it becomes awkward where long programs are involved.  More advanced
methods will be discussed in Chapter 6.


Things You Have Learned
-----------------------

- Subroutines can be called from machine language using the JSR command.
  There are several useful kernal subroutines permanently available.

- A BASIC program may call a machine language program as a subroutine:  the
  BASIC command is SYS.  The machine language subroutine returns to the
  calling point with an RTS (return from subroutine) instruction.

                                                                         :36:

- The CHROUT subroutine at address $FFD2 allows output of a character,
  usually to the screen.  In addition to printable characters, special
  cursor- and color-control characters may be sent.

- Most machine language monitors have a small assembler to help program
  preparation, and a disassembler to assist in program checking.

- Immediate mode is signaled by use of the # symbol.  The computer is asked
  to take the value given, instead of going to a specified address for its
  data.

- X and Y are called index registers.  We may add the contents of X or Y to a
  specified address, to create an effective address that changes as the
  program runs.  This addition is called indexing.

- X and Y also have special instructions that increase or decrease the
  selected register by one.  These are called increment and decrement
  instructions, and are coded INX, INY, DEX, and DEY.


Questions and Projects
----------------------

Look through the table of ASCII characters in Appendix D.  note that hex 93
is "clear screen."  Write a program to clear the screen and print "HO HO!".

You may have noticed that in our example, we had register X counting up from
zero to the desired value.  What would happen if you started X at 5 and
counted down?  Try it if you like.

Remember that you can also include cursor movements, color codes (if your
machine has color), and other special ASCII characters.  Could you lay out
the coding to draw a box?  (Try it in BASIC first).  Draw a box with the word
HELLO inside it.

                                                                         :37:
                                                                         :38:
                                                                         :39:


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "stopgap_save_using_data_and_poke" which expands on practical save/reload technique referenced in the summary
- "chrout_output_subroutine" which expands on reminder to use CHROUT for output and control characters
