# MACHINE - Appendix H: Supermon instructions overview. Supermon is a monitor generator that locates a good spot in memory and writes a machine language monitor (MLM). Lists essential commands (.R registers, .M memory, .S save, .L load, .G go, .X exit) and extras (.A assemble, .D disassemble). Additional commands in many versions: .F fill memory, .H hunt for pattern, .T transfer a block. Notes some versions include single-step '.I'.

                                                         Appendix H

                                                           Supermon
                                                       Instructions



Program Supermon is not a monitor; it is a monitor generator that will make a
machine language monitor for you.  There's a reason for this.  Supermon finds
a likely spot in memory and then plunks the MLM there so as to fit it into
the most suitable place.

Load Supermon and say RUN.  It will write an MLM for you, and call it up.
Now, exit back to BASIC and command NEW.  You do not want the MLM builder any
more (it's done the job) and you do not want the danger of building two--or
more--MLM's.  Get rid of the generator program.  Any time you need to use the
MLM, give SYS4 or SYS8, as appropriate.

Supermon contains the following "essential" commands:

  .R - to display (and change) registers
  .M - to display (and change) memory
  .S - to save memory to disk or tape
  .L - to load from disk or tape
  .G - go to a ML program
  .X - to exit to BASIC

Supermon also contains the following extra commands:

  .A - to assemble
  .D - to disassemble

                                                                        :238:

Most versions of Supermon (not the "do-it-yourself" below [which is omitted
-wf]) contain the following commands.  Though not used by this book, they are
useful:

  .F - fills memory with fixed constants
       .F 1800 18FF 00
  .H - hunts for a memory pattern:
       .H 0800 1800 20 D2 FF
  .T - transfers a block of memory to a new location
       .T 0800 0BFF 8000

A few versions of Supermon contain the command .I which causes machine
language single stepping.


