# MACHINE - Advantages of symbolic assemblers over small monitors: labels, forward references, automatic address fixups, comments in source, printable listings, save/load source for iterative development. Discusses pain of inserting bytes mid-code when using monitors versus easy insertion with assemblers.

Symbolic Assemblers
-------------------

Throughout these exercises, we have used small, "nonsymbolic" assemblers such
as would be found within a machine language monitor.  These are good for
beginners; they parallel the machine code quite closely and allow you to keep
the working machine clearly in focus.

As you write bigger and better programs, these small assemblers will be less
convenient.  Forward branches and subroutines we have not yet written make it
necessary for us to "guess" at the address and fix up our guess later.  There
is the possible danger that an address will be typed in wrongly ($0345
instead of $0354), causing the program to fail.

                                                                        :144:

To help us write more ambitious programs, we may wish to turn to commercially
available assembler systems that allow labels or symbolic addresses.  If we
wish to write code to call a subroutine to input numbers--we might not have
written this subroutine yet--we can code JSR NUMIN.  When we write the
subroutine, we'll put the identifying label NUMIN at the start.  As your
program is assembled, the proper address of NUMIN is determined, and this
address will be inserted as needed.

It saves work and helps guard against errors.  But symbolic assemblers allow
a more powerful capability:  they help documentation and allow program
updating.

Your assembly may be listed to the printer.  This allows you to examine and
annotate your program, and file the details away for later reference.  The
assembler allows you to include comments, which improve the readability of
the listing but don't affect the machine language program.

The source program you have written may be saved and used again later.  If
you find it is necessary to change the program, bring back the source code
from cassette or disk, make the changes, and reassemble.  In this way,
programs can be easily corrected or updated.

[An even worse case scenario is when you find that you need to insert a few
instructions in the middle of your machine code.  Within a monitor, you need
to adjust all of your addresses forward by some number of bytes, retype the
entire section of code which follows your change, as well as modify any
instructions prior to your change which reference affected addresses.  If you
were using an assembler, you can merely insert those instructions into the
source file and let the assembler figure out all of the addressing issues.
-wf]


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "debugging_methods_and_use_of_monitor" which expands on How assemblers simplify debugging and maintenance
