# - C64 RAM Map (Mapping The Commodore 64) - $033C-$03FB TBUFFR: 192-byte cassette I/O buffer used to hold data read/written to tape. Describes typical uses (program header blocks, data headers, data storage blocks), format of blocks (identifier byte at $033C, header blocks contain start/end RAM address and filename padded to 187 bytes, data blocks contain 191 bytes of data). Explains identifier values: 1 = relocatable program header, 3 = nonrelocatable program header, 4 = data file header (used when opening tape files), 2 = data blocks, 5 = logical end of tape. Notes practical reuse of buffer for ML routines or VIC-II graphics when tape not in use (e.g., sprite blocks at $0340-$03BF).

$033C-$03FB  TBUFFR  Cassette I/O Buffer
                     
                     This 192-byte buffer area is used to temporarily hold data that is
                     read from or written to the tape device (device number 1).
                     
                     When not being used for tape I/O, the cassette buffer has long been a
                     favorite place for Commodore programmers to place short machine
                     language routines (although the 64 has 4K of unused RAM above the
                     BASIC ROM at 49152 ($C000) that would probably better serve the
                     purpose).
                     
                     Of more practical interest to the 64 programmer is the possible use of
                     this area for VIC-II chip graphics memory (for example, sprite shape
                     data or text character dot data).  If the VIC-II chip is banked to the
                     lowest 16K of memory (as is the default selection), there is very
                     little memory space which can be used for such things as sprite shape
                     data without conflict.  If the tape is not in use, locations 832-895
                     ($0340-$037F) can be used as sprite data block number 13, and locations
                     896-959 ($0380-$03BF) can be used as sprite data block number 14.
                     
                     The types of tape blocks that can be stored here are program header
                     blocks, data header blocks, and data storage blocks.
                     
                     The first byte of any kind of block (which is stored at location 828
                     ($033C)) identifies the block type.  Header blocks follow this
                     identifier byte with the two-byte starting RAM address of the tape
                     data, the two-byte ending RAM address, and the filename, padded with
                     blanks so that the total length of the name portion equals 187 bytes.
                     Data storage blocks have 191 bytes of data following the identifier
                     byte.  The meanings of the various identifier blocks are as follows:
                     
                     A value of 1 signifies that the block is the header for a relocatable
                     program file, while a value of 3 indicates that the block is the
                     header for a nonrelocatable program file.
                     
                     A relocatable file is created when a program is SAVEd with a secondary
                     address of 0 (or any even number), while a nonrelocatable program file
                     is created if the secondary SAVE address is 1 (or any odd number).
                     The difference between the two types of files is that a nonrelocatable
                     program will always load at the address specified in the header.  A
                     relocatable program will load at the current start of BASIC address
                     unless the LOAD statement uses a secondary address of 1, in which case
                     it will also be loaded at the address specified in the header.
                     
                     You should note that a program file uses the cassette buffer only to
                     store the header block.  Actual program data is transferred directly
                     to or from RAM, without first being buffered.
                     
                     An identifier value of 4 means that the block is a data file header.
                     Such a header block is stored in the cassette buffer whenever a BASIC
                     program OPENs a tape data file for reading or writing.  Subsequent
                     data blocks start with an identifier byte of 2.  These blocks contain
                     the actual data byte written by the PRINT #1 command, and read by the
                     GET #1 and INPUT #1 commands.  Unlike the body of a program file,
                     these blocks are temporarily stored in the cassette buffer when being
                     written or read.
                     
                     An identifier byte of 5 indicates that this block is the logical end
                     of the tape.  This signals the Kernal not to search past this point,
                     even if there are additional tape blocks physically present on the
                     tape.
                     

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "irqtmp_cassette_irq_vector_save" which expands on cassette I/O routines and IRQ vector swapping
- "unused_02A7_02FF" which expands on alternative small RAM areas for ML/graphics
