# COMMODORE 64 - The 6510 stack: purpose as temporary storage and return addresses (similar to BASIC GOSUB/RETURN), stack operations (PHA, PLA, PHP, PLP), stack location in page one ($0100–$01FF), stack grows downward (first free position is $01FF), and behavior of the stack pointer (S) when pushing/popping.

  THE STACK

    The 6510 microprocessor has what is known as a stack. This is used by
  both the programmer and the microprocessor to temporarily remember
  things, and to remember, for example, an order of events. The GOSUB
  statement in BASIC, which allows the programmer to call a subroutine,
  must remember where it is being called from, so that when the RETURN
  statement is executed in the subroutine, the BASIC interpreter "knows"
  where to go back to continue executing. When a GOSUB statement is
  encountered in a program by the BASIC interpreter, the BASIC interpreter
  "pushes" its current position onto the stack before going to do the
  subroutine, and when a RETURN is executed, the interpreter "pulls" off
  the stack the information that tells it where it was before the
  subroutine call was made. The interpreter uses instructions like PHA,
  which pushes the contents of the accumulator onto the stack, and PLA (the
  reverse) which pulls a value off the stack and into the accumulator. The
  status register can also be pushed and pulled with the PHP and PLP,
  respectively.
    The stack is 256 bytes long, and is located in page one of memory. It
  is therefore from $01 00 to $01 FF. It is organized backwards in memory.
  In other words, the first position in the stack is at $01 FF, and the
  last is at $0100. Another register in the 651 0 microprocessor is called
  the stack pointer, and it always points to the next available location in
  the stack. When something is pushed onto the stack, it is placed where
  the stack pointer points to, and the stack pointer is moved down to the
  next position (decremented). When something is pulled off the stack, the
  stack pointer is incremented, and the byte pointed to by the stack
  pointer is placed into the specified register.





  222   BASIC TO MACHINE LANGUAGE
~



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "machine_code_and_registers_overview" which expands on Stack pointer (S) described among internal registers
- "implied_mode_and_register_notation" which expands on PHA/PLA/PHP/PLP are implied-mode instructions discussed later
