# ********* - Time Of Day (TOD) Clock in the 6526 CIA: four registers (tenths, seconds, minutes, hours) stored in BCD. Hours register Bit 7 is AM/PM flag (1=PM). Reading hours latches the TOD registers (stops updates) until tenths register is read; writing hours latches writes until tenths written. Control Register B bit 7 selects whether TOD writes change alarm or clock. OS uses TOD in BASIC RND(0) seed (but RND(0) is flawed due to TOD not started by OS and BCD limitations). TOD has an alarm that can trigger an interrupt.

Location Range: 56328-56331 ($DC08-$DC0B)
Time of Day Clock (TOD)

In addition to the two general-purpose timers, the 6526 CIA chip has a
special-purpose Time of Day Clock, which keeps time in a format that
humans can understand a little more easily than microseconds.

This Time of Day Clock even has an alarm, which can cause an interrupt
at a specific time.  It is organized in four registers, one each for
hours, minutes, seconds, and tenths of seconds.  Each register reads
out in Binary Coded Decimal (BCD) format, for easier conversion to
ASCII digits.  A BCD byte is divided into two nybbles, each of which
represents a single digit in base 10.  Even though a four-bit nybble
can hold a number from 0 to 15, only the base 10 digits of 0-9 are
used.  Therefore, 10 0'clock would be represented by a byte in the
hours register with the nybbles 0001 and 0000, which stand for the
digits 1 and 0.  The binary value of this byte would be 16 (16 times
the high nybble plus the low nybble).  Each of the other registers
operates in the same manner.  In addition, Bit 7 of the hours register
is used as an AM/PM flag.  If that bit is set to 1, it indicates PM,
and if it is set to 0, the time is AM.

The Time of Day Clock Registers can be used for two purposes,
depending on whether you are reading them or writing to them.  If you
are reading them, you will always be reading the time.  There is a
latching feature associated with reading the hours register in order
to solve the problem of the time changing while you are reading the
registers.  For example, if you were reading the hours register just
as the time was changing from 10:59 to 11:00, it is possible that you
would read the 10 in the hours register, and by the time you read the
minutes register it would have changed from 59 to 00.  Therefore, you
would read 10:00 instead of either 10:59 or 11:00.

To prevent this kind of mistake, the Time of Day Clock Registers stop
updating as soon as you read the hours register, and do not start
again until you read the tenths of seconds register.  Of course, the
clock continues to keep time internally even though it does not update
the registers.  If you want to read only minutes, or seconds or tenths
of seconds, there is no problem, and no latching will occur.  But
anytime you read hours, you must follow it by reading tenths of
seconds, even if you don't care about them, or else the registers will
not continue to update.

Writing to these registers either sets the time or the alarm,
depending on the setting of Bit 7 of Control Register B (56335,
$DC0F).  If that bit is set to 1, writing to the Time of Day registers
sets the alarm.  If the bit is set to 0, writing to the Time of Day
registers sets the Time of Day clock.  In either case, as with reading
the registers, there is a latch function.  This function stops the
clock from updating when you write to the hours register.  The clock
will not start again until you write to the tenths of seconds
registers.

The only apparent use of the Time of Day Clock by the 64's Operating
System is in the BASIC RND statement.  There, the seconds and tenths
of seconds registers are read and their values used as part of the
seed value for the RND(0) command.

Nonetheless, this clock can be an invaluable resource for the 64 user.
It will keep time more accurately than the software clock maintained
at locations 60-162 ($A0-$A2) by the Timer A interrupt routine.  And
unlike that software clock, the Time of Day Clock will not be
disturbed when I/O operations disrupt the Timer A IRQ, or when the IRQ
vector is diverted elsewhere.  Not even a cold start RESET will
disrupt the time.  For game timers, just set the time for 00:00:00:0
and it will keep track of elapsed time in hours, minutes, seconds and
tenths of seconds format.

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "tod_registers_list" which expands on addresses and bit layouts for TOD registers
- "ciaicr_interrupt_control" which expands on TOD alarm interrupt source in ICR
