# Contents - How a TV produces an image: pixels, electron beam scanning left-to-right, horizontal and vertical sync pulses, number of scan lines (262.5 nominal), Commodore-specific values (200 visible scan lines + 62 border), refresh rate (60 Hz), and relation of CPU machine cycles to beam movement (~6 pixels per machine cycle).

HOW A COMPUTER DISPLAYS A PICTURE 

The face of a video display is coated with special 
phosphors. An electron beam strikes the face of the 
tube causing the phosphors to glow. On a black and 
white monitor, this process produces a dot. This 
glowing dot is called apixel A pixel is the smallest 
area that a computer can control on the screen. A 
color monitor uses three electron beams and three 
different colored phosphors to create one pixel. 

The electron beam scans from left to right 
across the face of the monitor. By controlling the 
intensity of the electron beam during its scan, dif- 



ferent points on the screen receive different inten- 
sities. 

When the beam gets to the right edge of the 
screen, a horizontal sync pulse causes the beam to 
cut its intensity and return to the left side of the 
screen on the next line down. This process is 
repeated 262-1/2 times to form one display screen. 
At the end of the screen, a vertical sync pulse is in- 
itiated. During the vertical sync pulse, the beam 
returns to the upper left side of the screen and the 
whole process is ready to start again. On the Com- 
modore 64, the computer's hardware automatically 
inserts both the horizontal and vertical sync pulses, 
so the programmer need not worry about generating 
them. 

When a Commodore 64 is driving the monitor, 
200 scan lines are used to display text and graphics 
with the other 62 lines being used for the border. 
The display process is repeated 60 times per second, 
providing a flicker free display. 

There is a time correlation between the speed 
of the microprocessor and the position of the beam 



1 



on the face of the screen. Some special effects can 
be created by using this fact and changing the 
display parameters on the fly. In the time it takes 
for the microprocessor to go through one machine 
cycle, the beam travels approximately 6 pixels on 
the display screen. 




---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "chapter1_introduction_tv_and_gaming" which expands on motivation for understanding the display
- "working_with_interrupts_and_raster" which expands on using raster interrupts to change display mid-frame
