# COMMODORE 64 - Guidance on using KERNAL routines in machine language programs: prepare parameters as required, call routines via JSR (they are SUBROUTINES ending with RTS), handle returned values and error codes (carry flag and accumulator), and a summary three-step process: 1) Set up, 2) Call the routine, 3) Error handling.










                                            BASIC TO MACHINE LANGUAGE   269
~


  HOW TO USE THE KERNAL


    When writing machine language programs it is often convenient to use
  the routines which are already part of the operating system for input/
  output, access to the system clock, memory management, and other similar
  operations. It is an unnecessary duplication of effort to write these
  routines over and over again, so easy access to the operating system
  helps speed machine language programming.
    As mentioned before, the KERNAL is a jump table. This is just a col-
  lection of JMP instructions to many operating system routines.
    To use a KERNAL routine you must first make all of the preparations
  that the routine demands. If one routine says that you must call another
  KERNAL routine first, then that routine must be called. If the routine
  expects you to put a number in the accumulator, then that number must be
  there. Otherwise your routines have little chance of working the way you
  expect them to work.
    After all preparations are made, you must call the routine by means of
  the JSR instruction. All KERNAL routines you can access are structured as
  SUBROUTINES, and must end with an RTS instruction. When the KERNAL
  routine has finished its task, control is returned to your program at the
  instruction after the JSR.
    Many of the KERNAL routines return error codes in the status word or
  the accumulator if you have problems in the routine. Good programming
  practice and the success of your machine language programs demand that
  you handle this properly. If you ignore an error return, the rest of your
  program might "bomb."
    That's all there is to do when you're using the KERNAL. Just these
  three simple steps:

    1) Set up
    2) Call the routine
    3) Error handling

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "kernal_overview_and_jump_table_purpose" which expands on Why use the KERNAL jump table instead of JSRing directly to ROM routines
- "kernal_routine_documentation_conventions_and_routine_list_intro" which expands on Conventions used to document each KERNAL routine and the routine list
