# MACHINE - USR function vs SYS command: SYS executes a fixed numeric address as subroutine; USR executes address stored in USR vector and is used as a function returning a value to BASIC. USR argument is computed into floating accumulator (shared memory $5E-$63 on PET or $61-$66 on VIC/C64) before call; result returned in floating accumulator. Beginners often avoid floating-point passing and use POKEs or integer variables.



USR:  A Brother to SYS
----------------------

We have used SYS a number of times.  It means, "Go to the address supplied
and execute machine code there as a subroutine."  USR is similar in may
respects:  it means, "Go to a fixed address and execute machine code there as
a subroutine."  The fixed address may be POKEd into the USR vector.  On most
Commodore machines this is at addresses 1 and 2; on the Commodore 64, it's at
addresses 7875 and 786 (hex 0311 and 0312).

                                                                        :117:

There's another difference that seems important at first.  SYS is a command;
USR is a function.  You cannot type the command USR(0)--all you'll get is
SYNTAX ERROR.  You must say something like PRINT USR(0) or X=USR(0), where
USR is used as a function.  It seems as if SYS was meant to connect to action
programs, and USR was meant to link to evaluation programs.  In reality, the
difference in usage is not that great.

Whatever value is within the parentheses--the argument of the USR function--
is computed and placed into the floating accumulator before the USR function
is called.  The floating accumulator is located at $5E to $63 in most PET/CBM
computers, and at $61 to $66 in VIC-20, Commodore 64, and PLUS/4.  Floating-
point representation is complex, as we have hinted in Chapter 6.  Most
beginning programmers prefer to leave this area alone and pass values through
memory POKEs or integer values.

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "basic_variable_table_and_types" which expands on floating accumulator and variable formats when exchanging data
