# Kick Assembler - Table of vector functions/operators: get(n), getX(), getY(), getZ(), + (vector addition), - (subtraction), * Number (scale), * Vector (dot product), / (divide by scalar), X(v) (cross product). Also introduces Matrix() creation and get/set for 4x4 matrices plus further constructors.

the coordinates, to scale them, to rotate then, etc. The Matrix() operator creates an identity matrix, which is one
that leaves the coordinates unchanged. By using the set function you can construct any matrix you like. However,
Kick Assembler has constructor functions that create the most common transformation matrixes:

Table 14.4. Matrix Value Constructors
Function

Description

Matrix()

Creates an identity matrix.

68

Special Features

Function

Description

RotationMatrix(aX,aY,aZ)

Creates a rotation matrix where aX, aY and aZ are the
angles rotated around the x, y and z axis. The angles are
given in radians.

ScaleMatrix(sX,sY,sZ)

Creates a scale matrix where the x coordinate is scaled
by sX, the y-coordinate by sY and the z-coordinate by
sZ.

MoveMatrix(mX,mY,mZ)

Creates a move matrix that moves mX along the x-axis,
mY along the y-axis and mZ along the z-axis.

PerspectiveMatrix(zProj)

Creates a perspective projection where the eye-point is
placed in (0,0,0) and coordinates are projected on the
XY-plane where z=zProj.

You can multiply the matrixes and thereby combine their transformations. The transformation is read from
right to left, so if you want to move the space 10 along the x axis and then rotate it 45 degrees around the zaxis, you write:
.var m = RotationMatrix(0,0,toRadians(45))*MoveMatrix(10,0,0)

To transform a coordinate you multiply the matrix to transformed vector:
.var v = m*Vector(10,0,0)
.print "Transformed v=" + v

The functions defined on matrixes are the following:

Table 14.5. Matrix Value Functions
Function/Operator

Example

Description

get(n,m)

Gets the value at n,m.

set(n,m,value)

Sets the value at n,m.

*Vector


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "making_3d_calculations_intro" which expands on vector basics and examples
