# ********* - Detailed descriptions of the four 16K memory blocks (Block 0..3) for VIC-II use: Block 0 (system variables, BASIC text, character ROM visible at $1000-$1FFF limiting graphics), Block 1 (BASIC program storage - available for graphics but lacks character ROM), Block 2 (8K RAM under BASIC ROM and 8K BASIC ROM area — VIC sees RAM under ROM for display but BASIC can't read it), Block 3 (RAM under Kernal ROM and I/O - good for graphics but may conflict with DOS). Includes considerations: copying character ROM, limits for bitmap/screen usage, and conflicts with OS/DOS at specific addresses.

reserve memory after the end of BASIC text by lowering the end of
BASIC pointer at 56 ($38), or raise the start of BASIC pointer at 44
($2C).  See the entries for these pointers for more details.

Block 1.  Block 1 is normally used for BASIC program storage.  When
using this bank, the VIC-II does not have access to the character
generator ROM.  Providing that you lower the top of memory so that
BASIC programs do not interfere, this area is wide open for sprite
shapes, character graphics, and bitmap graphics.

The drawbacks to useing this bank are the unavailability of the
character ROM and the limitation on BASIC program space (as little as
14K).  The absence of the character ROM is a relatively minor
nuisance, because you can always switch in the ROM and copy any or all
of the characters to RAM (see the entries for location 1 and the
alternate entry for 53248 ($D000), the Character ROM, for details).
This block may be a good alternate choice to avoid potential conflicts
with other applications that use higher memory.

Block 2.  The third block (Block 2) consists of 8K of RAM, half of
which is seen by the VIC-II chip as character ROM, and the 8K BASIC
interpreter ROM.  The BASIC ROM area is available for graphics.  This
is possible because of the 64's special addressing.  The VIC-II chip
reads only from RAM, and thus sees the RAM underneath the BASIC ROM,
even if the 6510 has ROM switched in.  The 6510, on the other hand,
always writes to RAM, even when dealing with memory it reads as ROM.
Whatever is written to the RAM underlying the BASIC ROM is displayed
normally by the VIC-II chip.  This opens up an extra 8K are for
sprites and character data under the BASIC ROM.

You should keep in mind that while you can write to this area, you
cannot read it from BASIC.  This may not be a serious problem when it
comes to character sets and sprite data, but it's more of a drawback
if you want to use this RAM for screen memory.

For example, the Operating System has to read the text screen to move
the cursor properly, and if it reads the ROM value instead of the RAM
screen data, it gets hopelessly confused, making it impossible to type
in any commands.

Likewise, you would not be able to read the high-resolution screen if
it were placed here, without some machine language trickery.  With
locations 36863-40959 ousted by the character ROM, only 4K of true RAM
remains for use as screen memory, not enough for a complete
high-resolution screen.  Therefore, this block is not recommended for
use in bitmap mode if your program needs to check the screen.
Otherwise, this is a good place for graphics memory, particularly if
you need to emulate the screen configuration of the PET.

Block 3.  Normally Block 3 contains 4K of RAM that is completely
unused by the system, 4K if I/O registers, and the 8K Operating System
Kernal ROM.  It is very convenient to use when you need a lot of
memory space for both graphics and a BASIC program.  Although the
character ROM is not available, it can be copied to RAM.  The area
under the Kernal ROM can be used as explained above.  One possible
conflict that you should be aware of is that the current version of
the DOS support program is written to reside at 52224 ($CC00).  It
would be safest to avoid using 52224-53247 for graphics if you plan to
use DOS support.

Changing banks.  Once you have selected a bank of 16K to use, the
procedure for making the change from BASIC is as follows:

1.  Set the Data Direction Register if necessary.  In order to use
Bits 0 and 1 of Port A to change banks, these bits must be set as
outputs in Data Direction Register A.  Since this is the default
condition on powering-up, this step normally will not be needed.

2.  Select a bank.  Banks 0-3 can be chosen by entering the following
lines:

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "vic_ii_memory_banking_bits_in_cia2_porta" which expands on bank bit patterns and selection
- "changing_vic_memory_banks_from_basic" which expands on how to change banks and set VIC-II pointers
