# - C64 I/O Map (Mapping The Commodore 64) - VIC-II bank/block 2 description (32768-49151 / Block 2): 8K of RAM where half is seen by VIC-II as character ROM and 8K BASIC ROM area. VIC-II reads RAM underneath BASIC ROM allowing use of that RAM for graphics while 6510 still reads ROM when needed; you can write to this area but BASIC cannot read it directly. Limitations for screen memory and advice against using this block for full high-resolution screens without machine-language tricks.

                          Block 2.  The third block (Block 2) consists of 8K of RAM, half of
                          which is seen by the VIC-II chip as character ROM, and the 8K BASIC
                          interpreter ROM.  The BASIC ROM area is available for graphics.  This
                          is possible because of the 64's special addressing.  The VIC-II chip
                          reads only from RAM, and thus sees the RAM underneath the BASIC ROM,
                          even if the 6510 has ROM switched in.  The 6510, on the other hand,
                          always writes to RAM, even when dealing with memory it reads as ROM.
                          Whatever is written to the RAM underlying the BASIC ROM is displayed
                          normally by the VIC-II chip.  This opens up an extra 8K are for
                          sprites and character data under the BASIC ROM.

                          You should keep in mind that while you can write to this area, you
                          cannot read it from BASIC.  This may not be a serious problem when it
                          comes to character sets and sprite data, but it's more of a drawback
                          if you want to use this RAM for screen memory.

                          For example, the Operating System has to read the text screen to move
                          the cursor properly, and if it reads the ROM value instead of the RAM
                          screen data, it gets hopelessly confused, making it impossible to type
                          in any commands.

                          Likewise, you would not be able to read the high-resolution screen if
                          it were placed here, without some machine language trickery.  With
                          locations 36863-40959 ousted by the character ROM, only 4K of true RAM
                          remains for use as screen memory, not enough for a complete
                          high-resolution screen.  Therefore, this block is not recommended for
                          use in bitmap mode if your program needs to check the screen.
                          Otherwise, this is a good place for graphics memory, particularly if
                          you need to emulate the screen configuration of the PET.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "vic_memory_block1_description" which expands on Trade-offs vs Block 1
- "character_generator_rom_overview_and_bit_values" which expands on Relation of character ROM and using RAM-under-ROM
