# byRiclianll - Notes recommending four utilities (in Appendix C): DISPLAY TRACK & SECTOR (hex dump utility), DISPLAY A BLOCK AVAILABILITY MAP (BAM visualizer), VIRTUAL DIRECTORY (displays entire directory including scratched files), and DISPLAY A CHAIN (traces a file's sector chain). Mentions options for sending output to screen or printer and brief usage notes.

You  will  find  four  of  the  utilities  listed  in  Appendix  C  particularly  helpful  in  furthering 
your  understanding  of  the  organization  of  a  diskette.  The  first  program  is  DISPLAY 
TRACK  &  SECTOR.  The  hex  dumps  in  this  section  were  generated  using  this  utility. 
A  hex  dump  can  be  sent  either  to  the  screen  or  printer.  When  sent  to  the  screen  only 
half  a  page  of  the  specified  track  and  sector  is  displayed  at  one  time  to  prevent  scroll- 
ing. Bytes  0  -  127  ($00  -  $7F)  are  displayed  first  followed  by  bytes  128  -  255  ($80 
-  $FF).  Use  this  program  for  your  own  experimentation.  The  second  program  is 
DISPLAY  A  BLOCK  AVAILABILITY  MAP.  It  portrays  the  BAM  in  a  two-dimensional 
representation.  The  diskette  name,  ID,  DOS  version,  and  blocks  free  are  also  displayed. 
The  third  program  is  VIRTUAL  DIRECTORY.  It  displays  a  directory  in  its  entirety 
including  scratched  files.  Output  can  be  directed  to  a  printer  by  changing  the  OPEN 
4,  3  statement  in  line  440  to  OPEN  4,4.  The  last  program,  DISPLAY  A  CHAIN,  traces 
a  file  chain.  The  chain  of  sectors  may  be  viewed  on  the  screen  or  sent  to  the  printer. 

The  programming  techniques  that  are  used  in  these  sample  programs  will  be  partially 
explained  in  later  sections. 

Now  that  we've  seen  how  the  directory  is  kept,  let's  look  at  how  the  different  types 
of  files  are  actually  stored  on  a  diskette.  We'll  start  by  looking  at  a  program  file. 

4.5  Program  File  Storage 

---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "sample_directory_sector_raw_dump" which expands on hex dumps generated by DISPLAY TRACK & SECTOR
- "directory_block_04_dump_part7_bytes_C0_FF" which expands on example produced by these utilities
