# COMMODORE 64 - Volume and frequency basics for the SID: register 24 (overall volume, 0–15) and how frequency uses two registers (high and low bytes). Frequency formula Fn = Fout / 0.06097; splitting Fn into high and low bytes: Fhi = INT(Fn/256), Flo = Fn - (256*Fhi). Notes on cycles per second and pitch; Appendix E referenced for frequency table across octaves.

  VOLUME CONTROL

    Chip register 24 contains the overall volume control. The volume can be
  set anywhere between 0 and 15. The other four bits are used for purposes
  we'll get into later. For now it is enough to know volume is 0 to 15.
  Look at line 30 to see how it's set in Example Program 1.

  FREQUENCIES OF SOUND WAVES

    Sound is created by the movement of air in waves. Think of throwing a
  stone into a pool and seeing the waves radiate outward. When similar
  waves are created in air, we hear it. If we measure the time between one
  peak of a wave and the next, we find the number of seconds for one cycle
  of the wave (n = number of seconds). The reciprocal of this number (1/n)
  gives you the cycles per second. Cycles per second are more commonly
  known as the frequency. The highness or lowness of a sound (pitch) is
  determined by the frequency of the sound waves produced.
    The sound generator in your Commodore computer uses two locations to
  determine the frequency. Appendix E gives you the frequency values you
  need to reproduce a full eight octaves of musical notes. To create a

  186   PROGRAMMING SOUND AND MUSIC
~


  frequency other than the ones listed in the note table use "Fout" (fre-
  quency output) and the following formula to represent the frequency (Fn)
  of the sound you want to create. Remember that each note requires both a
  high and a low frequency number.

             Fn = Fout/.06097

    Once you've figured out what Fn is for your "new" note the next step is
  to create the high and low frequency values for that note. To do this you
  must first round off Fn so that any numbers to the right of the decimal
  point are left off. You are now left with an integer value. Now you can
  set the high frequency location (Fhi) by using the formula
  Fhi=INT(Fn/256) and the low frequency location (Flo) should be
  Flo=Fn-(256*Fhi).
    At this point you have already played with one voice of your computer.
  If you wanted to stop here you could find a copy of your favorite tune
  and become the maestro conducting your own computer orchestra in your "at
  home" concert hall.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "example_program_1_code_and_explanation" which expands on example that sets volume and writes high/low frequency bytes per note
