# COMMODORE 64 - Introduction to machine language and the Commodore 64 operating system: defines machine language as the native instruction set of the microprocessor, explains the role of the built-in OS and BASIC interpreter (both machine language programs stored in ROM), and how BASIC commands are interpreted by machine language routines. Discusses READY prompt and that the operating system organizes memory and provides system services.

  WHAT IS MACHINE LANGUAGE?

    At the heart of every microcomputer, is a central microprocessor. It's
  a very special microchip which is the "brain" of the computer. The
  Commodore 64 is no exception. Every microprocessor understands its own
  language of instructions. These instructions are called machine language
  instructions. To put it more precisely, machine language is the ONLY
  programming language that your Commodore 64 understands. It is the NATIVE
  language of the machine.
    If machine language is the only language that the Commodore 64
  understands, then how does it understand the CBM BASIC programming
  language? CBM BASIC is NOT the machine language of the Commodore 64.
  What, then, makes the Commodore 64 understand CBM BASIC instructions like
  PRINT and GOTO?
    To answer this question, you must first see what happens inside your
  Commodore 64. Apart from the microprocessor which is the brain of the
  Commodore 64, there is a machine language program which is stored in a
  special type of memory so that it can't be changed. And, more impor-
  tantly, it does not disappear when the Commodore 64 is turned off, unlike
  a program that you may have written. This machine language program is
  called the OPERATING SYSTEM of the Commodore 64. Your Commodore 64 knows
  what to do when it's turned on because its OPERATING SYSTEM (program) is
  automatically "RUN."




  210   BASIC TO MACHINE LANGUAGE
~


    The OPERATING SYSTEM is in charge of "organizing" all the memory in
  your machine for various tasks. It also looks at what characters you type
  on the keyboard and puts them onto the screen, plus a whole number of
  other functions. The OPERATING SYSTEM can be thought of as the
  "intelligence and personality" of the Commodore 64 (or any computer for
  that matter). So when you turn on your Commodore 64, the OPERATING SYSTEM
  takes control of your machine, and after it has done its housework, it
  then says:

    READY.


    The OPERATING SYSTEM of the Commodore 64 then allows you to type on the
  keyboard, and use the built-in SCREEN EDITOR on the Commodore 64. The
  SCREEN EDITOR allows you to move the cursor, DELete, INSert, etc., and
  is, in fact, only one part of the operating system that is built in for
  your convenience.
    All of the commands that are available in CBM BASIC are simply
  recognized by another huge machine language program built into your
  Commodore 64. This huge program "RUNS" the appropriate piece of machine
  language depending on which CBM BASIC command is being executed. This
  program is called the BASIC INTERPRETER, because it interprets each
  command, one by one, unless it encounters a command it does not
  understand, and then the familiar message appears:

    ?SYNTAX ERROR

    READY.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "memory_map_and_machine_code_overview" which expands on where the operating system and BASIC interpreter reside in memory
- "writing_your_first_machine_language_instruction" which expands on how machine instructions are represented in memory
