# Contents - Human perception and animation: flicker fusion frequency (~24 Hz), screen period (1/60 second) as the fundamental timing unit for animation, how to move objects at integer pixels per screen update, multiplexing technique (alternating displays faster than 24 Hz) and its constraints.

WHAT IS ANIMATION 

As you were reading the description of the 
generation of a TV frame, you may have noticed that 
the only thing that a monitor can display is a series 
of still frames. Thus the question of how you can 
get animation out of still pictures arises. 

There is a characteristic of the human eye call- 
ed the flicker fusion frequency , which allows us to 
view TV shows and movies without seeing that they 
are made up of still frames. This frequency is 24 
frames a second. Any time a series of pictures is 
shown at a rate faster than 24 hertz, the eye can no 
longer distinguish the individual pictures. If the 
computer makes small changes in its display faster 
than 24 times per second, these changes will give 
the appearance of being continuous. 

It is important to understand that the programs 



you will be writing create a series of still frames, 
not continuous motion. Because the computer up- 
dates the screen 60 times per second, this is the 
fastest that any changes can occur on the screen. 
If an object is in motion at the speed of one pixel 
per screen change, it takes about 5.3 seconds for 
the object to get from one side of the screen to the 
other. If the object needs to go faster, it has to move 
more than one pixel per screen update. On the other 
hand, if the object is to go slower, it has to stay still 
during some screen updates. 

Because the video monitor provides a known 
minimum update time of 1/60 second, this tends to 
become the time period by which most aspects of 
the game are measured. This period of time (1/60 
second) will be called a screen. 

From what you have read, you might assume 
that completely different displays could alternate 30 
times per second, and the eye would fuse them. This 
is true; multiplexing is the term used to refer to this 
technique. Some care must be taken when you at- 
tempt to use this technique. The differences be- 
tween the two screens should not be excessive, and 
best results are achieved using small fast moving 
objects. 




---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "tv_display_principles" which expands on frame generation and refresh rate
- "working_with_interrupts_and_raster" which expands on synchronizing animation updates with raster/interrupts
