# MACHINE - Summary bullets for the chapter: estimating run times, switching input/output to files with CHKIN/CHKOUT and restoring with CLRCHN, using $FFE4 and $FFD2 for I/O, opening vs connecting to channels, full instruction set coverage reminder.


Even if you have no immediate plans to write new programs in machine
language, you will have gained an insight into the workings of your machine.
Everything that the machine does--BASIC, kernal, everything--is either
hardware or machine language.

With the elementary concepts we have introduced here, you will be able to go
deeper into more advanced texts.  Many programming books deal with the
abstract 650x chip.  That's hard for the beginner; it's difficult to see how
the instructions fit within the architecture of a real machine, or how the
programs can actually be placed within the computer.  By now, you should be
able to take a piece of abstract coding and fit it into your system.

                                                                        :145:

Many things start to happen at once when you take your first steps in machine
language programming.  You must learn to use the monitor.  You must learn a
good deal about how your machine is designed.  And you must learn how to fit
the pieces together.  It takes a while to adapt to the "information shock"--
but things start to fit together.  Eventually, you'll have a stronger and
sounder view of the whole computer:  hardware, software, languages, and
usage.


What You Have Learned
---------------------

- Machine language programs can have run times estimated fairly accurately.
  In many cases, however, machine language is so fast that detailed speed
  calculations are not needed.

- We can handle input from devices other than the keyboard by switching the
  identity of the designated input device.  If an input channel has been
  opened as a file, we may connect to it with JSR $FFC6 and disconnect with
  JSR $FFCC.

- We can handle output to devices other than the screen by switching the
  identity of the designated output device.  If an output channel has been
  opened as a file, we may connect to it with JSR $FFC9 and disconnect with
  JSR $FFCC.

- Once input or output has been switched, we may receive in the usual way
  with the subroutine at $FFE4, or send in the usual way with the subroutine
  at $FFD2.

- Be careful no to confuse connecting to a channel with opening a file.  In a
  typical program, we open a file only once, but we may connect to it and
  disconnect from it hundreds of times as we read or write data.

- You have met all the instructions of the 650x microprocessor.  There are
  enough for versatility, but not so many that you can't keep track of them
  all.  You have made a worthwhile start in the art and science of machine
  language programming.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "input_output_kernal_calls_and_output_switching" which expands on I/O subroutines and channel handling
- "instruction_set_review" which expands on Instruction coverage summary
