# MACHINE - Explains why logical operators are useful: to control individual bits (IA port I/O control lines), to mask input bits for testing (use AND and check Z), to create oscillating effects (EOR), and for code translation tasks. Provides ASCII vs binary example (ASCII '5' = %00110101 vs binary 5 = %00000101) and notes how AND/ORA can convert between ASCII and numeric values more simply than arithmetic.

Why Logical Operations?
-----------------------

We use these three commands--AND, ORA, and EOR--to change to control
individual bits within a byte of information.  The commands are unusual in
that each bit may be manipulated independently of the others.

We don't seem to be working with numbers when we use these commands.  Rather,
we're working with each individual bit, turning it on or off as we wish.

Why would we turn individual bits on or off?  There are several possible
reasons.  For example, we might wish to control external devices through the
IA's (interface adapters).  Within the IA's input and output ports each of
the eight bits might control a different signal; we might want to switch one
control line on or off without affecting other lines.

When we're looking at input from an IA port, we often read several input
lines mixed together within a byte.  If we want to test a specific bit to see
if it is on or off, we might mask out all the other bits with the AND
instruction (changing unwanted bits to zero); if the remaining bit is zero,
the whole byte will now be zero and the Z flag will be set.

Why would we want to flip bits over?  Many "oscillating" effects--screen
flashing or musical notes--can be accomplished this way.

Finally the logical operators can be useful in code translation.  For
example, here are the values for ASCII 5 and binary 5:

  ASCII   %00110101
  Binary  %00000101

We must use the ASCII value for input or output.  We must use the binary
value for arithmetic, particularly addition and subtraction.  How could we
get from one to the other?  By taking bits out (AND) or putting bits in
(ORA).  Alternatively, we could use addition or subtraction; the logical
operators, however, are simpler.



---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "logical_eor_and_examples" which expands on EOR example and flipping bits
- "getin_subroutine_keyboard_input" which expands on GETIN returns ASCII input useful to convert with logical ops
