# An Introduction to Programming C-64 Demos - Why use interrupts: avoid polling, stable timing, use of CIAs for timers, VIC for raster and sprite-collision interrupts. IRQ loaders rely on interrupts to load parts without breaking demo display.

I suppose we'll have to answer this question, although it might seem stupid. There really isn't anything that keeps you from writing demos that don't use interrupts. If you just know how to turn of the CIA interrupts, you're safe from all the jittering and flickering we've experienced so far. But there are more things you can do with the help of interrupts, and you really need to know about them in order to have control over your computer. And demos are all about control. You'll also need to know about interrupts to be able to use an IRQ-loader, and if you're planning to ever write a demo that's bigger than what will fit in your computer's memory, you'll need to use a loader. And there's no excuse for not using an IRQ-loader these days.

In this text, we'll concentrate on raster interrupts, because that's what you'll use most often in demos. We'll also go into NMIs a bit, because it's very useful to know about them. And of course, if you've written a demo that looks great and that people love, it can feel pretty embarrasing if you can kill it just by pressing RUN/STOP + RESTORE...


What is an Interrupt?
A fair question to ask at this stage is what an interrupt is. They're a very simple, and very efficient way of handling some things. They work pretty much like an alarm clock.

Let's say you're going to bed after a long night of demo coding, and you have to get up at eight in the morning, to go to school or work. What do you do? You set your alarm clock to ring at eight, and then you can safely go to sleep, without having to worry, knowing that the clock will wake you up at eight. Until then, you can sleep all you want.

That's exactly how interrupts work: you set up an interrupt to wake up the CPU at some time and tell it to do something special, but until then the CPU can do its normal things. So, what you do when you set up an interrupt is to define when the interrupt should happen and what should happen when the interrupt is triggered.

On the C-64, you have some different types of interrupts to watch out for. You have two CIAs, which can both generate timer interrupts (tell the CIA to give you an interrupt after X clock cycles), you have the VIC, which can generate raster interrupts (generate an interrupt when we reach a certain raster line), sprite collision interrupts (generate an interrupt when two sprites collide) etc.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "irq_loaders" which expands on use of interrupts by loaders
