# MACHINE - Explains reasons to use CHROUT instead of directly writing (POKE) to screen memory: automatic cursor placement, automatic scrolling, ASCII vs screen codes, screen memory location variability, honoring control characters (RETURN, cursor movement, color), and automatic color handling on VIC/64.


Why Not POKE?
-------------

It may seem that there's an easier way to make things appear on the screen.
We might POKE information directly to screen memory; in machine language, we
would call this a store rather than a POKE, of course.  The moment we change
something in this memory area, the information displayed on the screen will
change.  Screen memory is generally located at the following addresses:

  PET/CBM:       $8000 and up (decimal 32768)
  Commodore 64:  $0400 and up (decimal 1024)
  264/364:       $0C00 and up (decimal 3072)
  VIC-20:        $1E00 and up (decimal 7680)

The screen memory of the VIC-20 in particular may move around a good deal,
depending on how much additional RAM memory has been fitted.

Occasionally, screen POKEs are the best way to do the job.  But most of the
time we'll use the CHROUT, $FFD2 subroutine.  Here are some of the reasons
why:

 o As with PRINT, we don't need to worry about where to place the next
   character; it will be positioned automatically at the cursor point.

 o If the screen is filled, scrolling will take place automatically.

 o Screen memory needs special characters.  For example, the character X has
   a standard ASCII code of $58, but to POKE it to the screen we'd need to
   use the code $18.  The CHROUT subroutine uses $58.

 o Screen memory may move around, depending on the system and the program.
   The POKE address would need to change; but CHROUT keeps working.

 o Special control characters are honored:  $0D for RETURN, to start a new
   line; cursor movements; color changes.  We can even clear the screen by
   loading the screen-clear character ($93) and calling $FFD2.

 o To POKE the screen of the VIC or Commodore 64, the corresponding color
   nybble memory must also be POKEd (see the appropriate memory map in
   Appendix B).  With the subroutine at $FFD2, color is set automatically.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "printing_single_character_steps" which expands on alternative to direct POKE to display characters
- "print_project_building_H_program" which expands on practical printing example using CHROUT
