# COMMODORE 64 - Methods for creating machine language programs: assemblers vs manual POKEing; explanation of assembler and disassembler, and the 64MON monitor cartridge (features: register display, memory editor, assembler/disassembler). Recommendation to use an assembler and note that examples use 64MON conventions.

  HOW DO YOU WRITE MACHINE LANGUAGE PROGRAMS?

    Since machine language programs reside in memory, and there is no
  facility in your Commodore 64 for writing and editing machine language

  214   BASIC TO MACHINE LANGUAGE
~


  programs, you must use either a program to do this, or write for yourself
  a BASIC program that "allows" you to write machine language.
    The most common methods used to write machine language programs are
  assembler programs. These packages allow you to write machine language
  instructions in a standardized mnemonic format, which makes the machine
  language program a lot more readable than a stream of numbers! Let's
  review: A program that allows you to write machine language programs in
  mnemonic format is called an assembler. Incidentally, a program that
  displays a machine language program in mnemonic format is called a
  disassembler. Available for your Commodore 64 is a machine language
  monitor cartridge (with assembler/disassembler, etc.) made by Commodore:


  64MON

    The 64MON cartridge available from your local dealer, is a program that
  allows you to escape from the world of CBM BASIC, into the land of
  machine language. It can display the contents of the internal registers
  in the 6510 microprocessor, and it allows you to display portions of mem-
  ory, and change them on the screen, using the screen editor. It also has
  a built-in assembler and disassembler, as well as many other features
  that allow you to write and edit machine language programs easily. You
  don't HAVE to use an assembler to write machine language, but the task is
  considerably easier with it. If you wish to write machine language
  programs, it is strongly suggested that you purchase an assembler of some
  sort. Without an assembler you will probably have to "POKE" the machine
  language program into memory, which is totally unadvisable. This manual
  will give its examples in the format that 64MON uses, from now on. Nearly
  all assembler formats are the same, therefore the machine language
  examples shown will almost certainly be compatible with any assembler.
  But before explaining any of the other features of 64MON, the hexadecimal
  numbering system must be explained.


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "simple_memory_map_overview" which expands on Memory areas where assembled programs live
- "hex_notation_and_64mon_examples" which expands on Hexadecimal notation used in assemblers and 64MON examples
