# Sprite Multiplexing Techniques by Cadaver (Lasse Oorni) - Method 2.4.1: 'Just before the new sprite'—wait until raster is close to the sprite's start Y and then write the sprite registers. 'Close enough' depends on worst-case time to write all relevant sprite registers (writing 8 sprites could require ~10-12 lines). Benefits of precalculation: decide adjustment based on number of sprites to write, and write Y-coordinates first (they're critical) then X/frame/color. Precalculated interrupts allow optimized timing and reduce cosmetic errors.

2.4.1 Just before the new sprite

The idea is to wait until we are close enough to the starting Y-coordinate of a
sprite, and then write the sprite registers. If the following sprite is close
to it, it can also be written in the same raster interrupt.

What is "close enough"? In fact, it is the amount of rastertime taken to write
all 8 sprites under a worst-case condition. If we come closer to a sprite's
Y-coordinate before writing the registers, there could be the possibility that
we don't have time to write all 8 sprites, if all of them would happen to be
at the same Y-coordinate. But the closer we can come, the neater tight-packed
sprite formations will look like (less graphical errors.)

If the raster interrupts (when they happen, from what sprite to start, how many
sprites to write) are precalculated, there are two benefits:

- The "close enough"-factor (adjustment to raster interrupt position) can be
  decided based on the number of sprites that will be written in the next
  raster interrupt. For example, if there's only one sprite, the interrupt
  can happen just for example 2 lines before its Y-coordinate, but if there's
  all sprites, the interrupt must happen about 10-12 lines before.

- Y-coordinates are critical, they must be ready when the sprites start to
  display, everything else is cosmetic. So we can write the Y-coordinates first
  in the raster interrupt, because we know what sprites to write, and only
  after that the rest (X-coords, frame, color)


---
Additional information can be found by searching:
- "raster_interrupt_code_example_and_notes" which expands on shows naive register write sequence and $D010 MSB handling
- "raster_interrupt_optimizations_and_unrolled_code" which expands on shows faster per-physical-sprite unrolled code and optimizations
