# 6502 Addressing Modes - Relative Mode and Summary

Relative		aa

Relative addressing is only used with branch instructions.

The operand is a 1 byte 2’s complement number in the range -128 to +127.  This is added to the address of the instruction following the branch instruction, to give the address of the instruction to be jumped to.

BEQ	#$F5	F5 is equivalent to -11 decimal.  

This will cause the processor to take the address of the instruction immediately following the branch instruction, subtract 11 from it, and carry on from whichever instruction is at that location – provided that the zero flag is set.

Luckily, the assembler allows you to use labels, so that you don’t have to keep counting bytes.

LB1:	LDA	$FA55
	INX
	BEQ	LB1

SUMMARY
Low level instructions often contain an operand, which is usually a memory address.  It normally refers to the location of a data item in the computers memory.  There are several ways in which the processor might interpret the operand, and these are called addressing modes.  The examples below are the five basic modes available in some form on most processors.
Absolute (Direct) addressing
The operand is the address in memory where the data item can be found.
LDA	$6F55		This instruction will access memory location $6F55, and copy the contents into the accumulator register.
			
Immediate addressing
The operand is the data item.
LDA	#41		This instruction will load the number 41 ($29) into the accumulator register.
			
Indexed addressing
The operand is added to the contents of the index register, and this gives the location in memory of the data.
LDA	$4F10,X		$34		This instruction will access the memory location $4F44, and copy the contents into the accumulator.
			Index Register X		
Indirect addressing
The operand is the address of a memory location which contains the address of the data item.
This instruction will load the data item 44 into the accumulator register.




Relative addressing
This is used in conjunction with branches.  The operand is a 2’s comp number (-128 - +127) which is added to the address of the instruction following the branch instruction to give the address of the instruction to be jumped to.
4545	BEQ	$13		This BEQ command will cause control to be passed to the instruction in location $4547 + $13 = $455A, provided that the zero flag is set.
4547	LDA	$9333		

