# 6502 Processor Status Register and Flag Bits


Processor Status Register


N	V	-	B	D	I	Z	C


Also known as the flags register.  Used to indicate the results of an operation.  Each bit in the register signifies a different condition.

Some of the instructions allow you to test the values of various bits, set them, clear them, and push the entire set onto the stack (or pop them off).


Carry Flag	C

The carry flag is set if the last operation caused an overflow from the most significant bit (bit 7) of the result or an underflow from the least significant bit (bit 0). 

This condition is set during arithmetic instructions, comparison instructions and during logical shifts.  It can be explicitly set using the 'Set Carry Flag' (SEC) instruction and cleared with 'Clear Carry Flag' (CLC).


Zero Flag 	Z

The zero flag is set if the result of the last operation was zero.


Interrupt Disable 	I

The interrupt disable flag is set if the program has executed a 'Set Interrupt Disable' (SEI) instruction. While this flag is set the processor will not respond to interrupts from external devices until it is cleared by a 'Clear Interrupt Disable' (CLI) instruction.


Decimal Mode 		D

While the decimal mode flag is set the processor will obey the rules of Binary Coded Decimal (BCD) arithmetic during addition and subtraction. The flag can be explicitly set using 'Set Decimal Flag' (SED) and cleared with 'Clear Decimal Flag' (CLD).


Break Command 	B

The break command bit is set when a BRK instruction has been executed and an interrupt has been generated to process it.


Overflow Flag 		V

The overflow flag is set during arithmetic operations if the result has yielded an invalid 2's complement result (e.g. adding two positive numbers and ending up with a negative result: 64 + 64 => -128). 

If the most significant bit of the two numbers being added is the same, and if it is different to the msb of the result, then the overflow flag will be set.

Negative Flag 		N

The negative flag is set if the result of the last operation had the most significant bit (bit 7) set to a one.

